{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.15063}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang9 #required for behaviour.xml\par
first=Riva\par
last=\par
label=Riva\par
gender=female\par
size=small\par
\par
#Number of phases to "finish" masturbating\par
timer=10\par
\par
#Tags describe characters and allow dialogue directed to only characters with these tags, such as: confident, blonde, and British. See tag_list.txt for a list of tags.\par
tag=tsundere\par
tag=blonde\par
tag=mean\par
tag=bisexual\par
tag=princess\par
\par
\par
#required for meta.xml\par
#select screen image\par
pic=0-calm\par
height=5'2"\par
from=The Legend of Dark Witch\par
writer=SuperfluousUser\par
artist=SuperfluousUser\par
description=The princess who stole the Syega for her father. Zizou's rival. Age: 19.\par
\par
\par
#You can have more than one start line, but make_xml won't pick them up automatically and they must be added manually after the xml is generated.\par
#When selecting the characters to play the game, the first line will always play, then it randomly picks from any of the start lines after you commence the game but before you deal the first hand.\par
start=0-calm,Do you think you're even fit to be in my presence?\par
\par
\par
\par
#CLOTHING\par
#Items of clothing should be listed here in order of removal.\par
#The values are formal name, lower case name, how much they cover, what they cover\par
#Please do not put spaces around the commas.\par
#How much they cover = important (covering nudity), major (a lot of skin), minor (small amount of skin), extra (accessories, boots, etc)\par
#What they cover = upper (upper body), lower (lower body), other (neither).\par
#There must be 2-8 entries, and at least one "important" piece of clothing on each of the upper and lower locations.\par
#Below is an example of Rosalina's clothing. Please adjust these values to match your character's clothing.\par
clothes=Necklace,necklace,extra,other\par
clothes=Shoes,shoes,extra,other\par
clothes=Gloves,gloves,extra,other\par
clothes=Pants,pants,major,lower\par
clothes=Top,top,important,upper\par
clothes=Thong,thong,important,lower\par
\par
\par
\par
#EXCHANGING CARDS\par
#This is what a character says while they're exchanging cards.\par
#The game will automatically put a display a number between 0-5 where you write ~cards~.\par
#These lines display on the screen for only a brief time, so it is important to make them short enough to read at a glance.\par
#The lines written here are examples only and should be replaced.\par
swap_cards=calm,Give me ~cards~ cards. Now.\par
swap_cards=calm,You will give me ~cards~, I demand it.\par
swap_cards=angry, Give to me ~cards~ new cards! Now!\par
\par
\par
\par
#HAND QUALITY\par
#These lines appear each round when a character is commenting on how good or bad their hand is.\par
#The lines written here are examples only and should be replaced.\par
\par
#stage-generic lines that will be used for every individual stage that doesn't have a line written\par
\par
#The character thinks they have a good hand\par
good_hand=happy,These will suffice.\par
good_hand=gloating,Oh, now my opponents will taste defeat.\par
good_hand=gloating,I will enjoy seeing my inferior opponets undress!\par
good_hand=happy,How I love the taste of victory!\par
good_hand=gloating,I can't be defeated by the likes of you peons.\par
good_hand=gloating,I will be the only one clothed at the end of this.\par
good_hand=happy,I will win with this hand. How could I not?\par
good_hand=gloating,Let's see one of you strip for your princess.\par
good_hand=gloating,How I enjoy lording my success over fools like all of you.\par
good_hand=happy,Wondeful! More success for me!\par
good_hand=gloating,How great am I?\par
good_hand=gloating,These cards are worthy of me.\par
\par
\par
#The character thinks they have an okay hand\par
okay_hand=calm,These cards are not good enough for my greatness.\par
okay_hand=calm,This hand is alright. Not good enough for me, but not bad.\par
okay_hand=calm,These cards are decent enough.\par
okay_hand=calm,Hmmm, okay then. It's not like I care.\par
okay_hand=calm,Well, I've seen better cards...\par
okay_hand=calm,Hmph...\par
okay_hand=calm,Not quite up to par for me.\par
okay_hand=calm,I need better cards, but I have had worse...\par
okay_hand=calm,I need something a little better than these.\par
okay_hand=calm,Give me better cards than these, Dealer.\par
okay_hand=calm,I want better cards than these... Give them to me....\par
okay_hand=strip,I need something  better than these. I'll give you a peek if you cheat for me.\par
\par
\par
#The character thinks they have a bad hand\par
bad_hand=angry,I deserve better than this!\par
bad_hand=angry,I command you to give me better cards!\par
bad_hand=angry,Give me better cards or suffer my wrath!\par
\par
#stage-specific lines that override the stage-generic ones\par
\par
#fully clothed\par
0-good_hand=gloating,My, my... All of you will soon suffer the humiliation of defeat!\par
0-good_hand=happy,All of you! Prepare to suffer defeat!\par
0-good_hand=happy,These will suffice.\par
0-good_hand=gloating,Oh, now my opponents will taste defeat.\par
0-good_hand=gloating,I will enjoy seeing my inferior opponets undress!\par
0-good_hand=happy,How I love the taste of victory!\par
0-good_hand=gloating,I can't be defeated by the likes of you peons.\par
0-good_hand=gloating,I will be the only one clothed at the end of this.\par
0-good_hand=happy,I will win with this hand. How could I not?\par
0-good_hand=gloating,Let's see one of you strip for your princess.\par
0-good_hand=gloating,How I enjoy lording my success over fools like all of you.\par
0-good_hand=happy,Wondeful! More success for me!\par
0-good_hand=gloating,How great am I?\par
0-good_hand=gloating,These cards are worthy of me.\par
0-okay_hand=calm,It will suffice.\par
0-okay_hand=shy,Not quite worthy of my beauty.\par
0-okay_hand=calm,These cards are not good enough for my greatness.\par
0-okay_hand=calm,This hand is alright. Not good enough for me, but not bad.\par
0-okay_hand=calm,These cards are decent enough.\par
0-okay_hand=calm,Hmmm, okay then. It's not like I care.\par
0-okay_hand=calm,Well, I've seen better cards...\par
0-okay_hand=calm,Hmph...\par
0-okay_hand=calm,Not quite up to par for me.\par
0-okay_hand=calm,I need better cards, but I have had worse...\par
0-okay_hand=calm,I need something a little better than these.\par
0-okay_hand=calm,Give me better cards than these, Dealer.\par
0-okay_hand=calm,I want better cards than these... Give them to me....\par
0-okay_hand=strip,I need something  better than these. I'll give you a peek if you cheat for me.\par
0-bad_hand=angry,How dare you, Dealer?\par
0-bad_hand=angry,The dealer will suffer the wrath of princess Riva!\par

\pard\lang1033 0-bad_hand=shy,Not this...\par
\par
0-bad_hand=angry,These cards are beneath me.\par
\par
0-bad_hand=shy,I will have my revenge for this.\par
\par
0-bad_hand=shy,These cards are worse than Zizou's ugly two-tone hair.\par
\par
0-bad_hand=loss,I DON'T WANT TO GET NAKED!\par
\par
0-bad_hand=loss,B-But I don't wanna strip...\par
\par
0-bad_hand=shy,I'm about ot lose due to these horrid cards...\par
\par
0-bad_hand=angry,Curses! I will take revenge on whoever wins this hand.\par
\par
0-bad_hand=angry,Damn you all.\par
\par
0-bad_hand=loss,I will take my revenge on you all! \par
\par
0-bad_hand=shy,I must not suffer this indignity again.\par
\par
0-bad_hand=shy,I don't want to lose again...\par
\par
0-bad_hand=angry,I won't stand for this humiliation! I will make whoever wins this hand suffer!\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang9\par
\par
#lost 1 item\par
1-good_hand=gloating,Weep, fools! For now you lose!\par
1-good_hand=happy,I will enjoy your humiliation, fools.\par
1-good_hand=happy,These will suffice.\par
1-good_hand=gloating,Oh, now my opponents will taste defeat.\par
1-good_hand=gloating,I will enjoy seeing my inferior opponets undress!\par
1-good_hand=happy,How I love the taste of victory!\par
1-good_hand=gloating,I can't be defeated by the likes of you peons.\par
1-good_hand=gloating,I will be the only one clothed at the end of this.\par
1-good_hand=happy,I will win with this hand. How could I not?\par
1-good_hand=gloating,Let's see one of you strip for your princess.\par
1-good_hand=gloating,How I enjoy lording my success over fools like all of you.\par
1-good_hand=happy,Wondeful! More success for me!\par
1-good_hand=gloating,How great am I?\par
1-good_hand=gloating,These cards are worthy of me.\par
1-okay_hand=calm,It's not quite good enough for me.\par
1-okay_hand=shy,It's not like I wanted better cards or anything.\par
1-okay_hand=calm,It will suffice.\par
1-okay_hand=shy,Not quite worthy of my beauty.\par
1-okay_hand=calm,These cards are not good enough for my greatness.\par
1-okay_hand=calm,This hand is alright. Not good enough for me, but not bad.\par
1-okay_hand=calm,These cards are decent enough.\par
1-okay_hand=calm,Hmmm, okay then. It's not like I care.\par
1-okay_hand=calm,Well, I've seen better cards...\par
1-okay_hand=calm,Hmph...\par
1-okay_hand=calm,Not quite up to par for me.\par
1-okay_hand=calm,I need better cards, but I have had worse...\par
1-okay_hand=calm,I need something a little better than these.\par
1-okay_hand=calm,Give me better cards than these, Dealer.\par
1-okay_hand=calm,I want better cards than these... Give them to me....\par
1-okay_hand=strip,I need something  better than these. I'll give you a peek if you cheat for me.\par
1-bad_hand=angry,Who is cheating me out of getting good cards?!\par
1-bad_hand=angry,Curse you! I will have my revenge!\par
1-bad_hand=angry,The dealer will suffer the wrath of princess Riva!\par

\pard\lang1033 1-bad_hand=shy,Not this...\par
\par
1-bad_hand=angry,These cards are beneath me.\par
\par
1-bad_hand=shy,I will have my revenge for this.\par
\par
1-bad_hand=shy,These cards are worse than Zizou's ugly two-tone hair.\par
\par
1-bad_hand=loss,I DON'T WANT TO GET NAKED!\par
\par
1-bad_hand=loss,B-But I don't wanna strip...\par
\par
1-bad_hand=shy,I'm about ot lose due to these horrid cards...\par
\par
1-bad_hand=angry,Curses! I will take revenge on whoever wins this hand.\par
\par
1-bad_hand=angry,Damn you all.\par
\par
1-bad_hand=loss,I will take my revenge on you all! \par
\par
1-bad_hand=shy,I must not suffer this indignity again.\par
\par
1-bad_hand=shy,I don't want to lose again...\par
\par
1-bad_hand=angry,I won't stand for this humiliation! I will make whoever wins this hand suffer!\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang9\par
\par
#lost 2 items\par
2-good_hand=gloating,Enjoying failure, my foolish opponents?\par
2-good_hand=happy,I will relish your stripteases, peons.\par
2-good_hand=happy,These will suffice.\par
2-good_hand=gloating,Oh, now my opponents will taste defeat.\par
2-good_hand=gloating,I will enjoy seeing my inferior opponets undress!\par
2-good_hand=happy,How I love the taste of victory!\par
2-good_hand=gloating,I can't be defeated by the likes of you peons.\par
2-good_hand=gloating,I will be the only one clothed at the end of this.\par
2-good_hand=happy,I will win with this hand. How could I not?\par
2-good_hand=gloating,Let's see one of you strip for your princess.\par
2-good_hand=gloating,How I enjoy lording my success over fools like all of you.\par
2-good_hand=happy,Wondeful! More success for me!\par
2-good_hand=gloating,How great am I?\par
2-good_hand=gloating,These cards are worthy of me.\par
2-okay_hand=calm,At least I can work with this.\par
2-okay_hand=shy,I deserve better. I'm beautiful.\par
2-okay_hand=calm,It will suffice.\par
2-okay_hand=shy,Not quite worthy of my beauty.\par
2-okay_hand=calm,These cards are not good enough for my greatness.\par
2-okay_hand=calm,This hand is alright. Not good enough for me, but not bad.\par
2-okay_hand=calm,These cards are decent enough.\par
2-okay_hand=calm,Hmmm, okay then. It's not like I care.\par
2-okay_hand=calm,Well, I've seen better cards...\par
2-okay_hand=calm,Hmph...\par
2-okay_hand=calm,Not quite up to par for me.\par
2-okay_hand=calm,I need better cards, but I have had worse...\par
2-okay_hand=calm,I need something a little better than these.\par
2-okay_hand=calm,Give me better cards than these, Dealer.\par
2-okay_hand=calm,I want better cards than these... Give them to me....\par
2-okay_hand=strip,I need something  better than these. I'll give you a peek if you cheat for me.\par
2-bad_hand=angry,NO! I WILL NOT ACCEPT THESE CARDS!\par
2-bad_hand=angry,I CURSE EVERYONE WHO WINS A HAND!\par
2-bad_hand=angry,The dealer will suffer the wrath of princess Riva!\par

\pard\lang1033 2-bad_hand=shy,Not this...\par
\par
2-bad_hand=angry,These cards are beneath me.\par
\par
2-bad_hand=shy,I will have my revenge for this.\par
\par
2-bad_hand=shy,These cards are worse than Zizou's ugly two-tone hair.\par
\par
2-bad_hand=loss,I DON'T WANT TO GET NAKED!\par
\par
2-bad_hand=loss,B-But I don't wanna strip...\par
\par
2-bad_hand=shy,I'm about ot lose due to these horrid cards...\par
\par
2-bad_hand=angry,Curses! I will take revenge on whoever wins this hand.\par
\par
2-bad_hand=angry,Damn you all.\par
\par
2-bad_hand=loss,I will take my revenge on you all! \par
\par
2-bad_hand=shy,I must not suffer this indignity again.\par
\par
2-bad_hand=shy,I don't want to lose again...\par
\par
2-bad_hand=angry,I won't stand for this humiliation! I will make whoever wins this hand suffer!\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang9\par
\par
#lost 3 items\par
3-good_hand=gloating,My, my... All of you will soon suffer the humiliation of defeat!\par
3-good_hand=happy,All of you! Prepare to suffer defeat!\par
3-good_hand=happy,These will suffice.\par
3-good_hand=gloating,Oh, now my opponents will taste defeat.\par
3-good_hand=gloating,I will enjoy seeing my inferior opponets undress!\par
3-good_hand=happy,How I love the taste of victory!\par
3-good_hand=gloating,I can't be defeated by the likes of you peons.\par
3-good_hand=gloating,I will be the only one clothed at the end of this.\par
3-good_hand=happy,I will win with this hand. How could I not?\par
3-good_hand=gloating,Let's see one of you strip for your princess.\par
3-good_hand=gloating,How I enjoy lording my success over fools like all of you.\par
3-good_hand=happy,Wondeful! More success for me!\par
3-good_hand=gloating,How great am I?\par
3-good_hand=gloating,These cards are worthy of me.\par
3-okay_hand=calm,It will suffice.\par
3-okay_hand=shy,Not quite worthy of my beauty.\par
3-okay_hand=calm,It will suffice.\par
3-okay_hand=shy,Not quite worthy of my beauty.\par
3-okay_hand=calm,These cards are not good enough for my greatness.\par
3-okay_hand=calm,This hand is alright. Not good enough for me, but not bad.\par
3-okay_hand=calm,These cards are decent enough.\par
3-okay_hand=calm,Hmmm, okay then. It's not like I care.\par
3-okay_hand=calm,Well, I've seen better cards...\par
3-okay_hand=calm,Hmph...\par
3-okay_hand=calm,Not quite up to par for me.\par
3-okay_hand=calm,I need better cards, but I have had worse...\par
3-okay_hand=calm,I need something a little better than these.\par
3-okay_hand=calm,Give me better cards than these, Dealer.\par
3-okay_hand=calm,I want better cards than these... Give them to me....\par
3-okay_hand=strip,I need something  better than these. I'll give you a peek if you cheat for me.\par
3-bad_hand=angry,How dare you, Dealer?\par
3-bad_hand=angry,The dealer will suffer the wrath of princess Riva!\par
3-bad_hand=angry,The dealer will suffer the wrath of princess Riva!\par

\pard\lang1033 3-bad_hand=shy,Not this...\par
\par
3-bad_hand=angry,These cards are beneath me.\par
\par
3-bad_hand=shy,I will have my revenge for this.\par
\par
3-bad_hand=shy,These cards are worse than Zizou's ugly two-tone hair.\par
\par
3-bad_hand=loss,I DON'T WANT TO GET NAKED!\par
\par
3-bad_hand=loss,B-But I don't wanna strip...\par
\par
3-bad_hand=shy,I'm about ot lose due to these horrid cards...\par
\par
3-bad_hand=angry,Curses! I will take revenge on whoever wins this hand.\par
\par
3-bad_hand=angry,Damn you all.\par
\par
3-bad_hand=loss,I will take my revenge on you all! \par
\par
3-bad_hand=shy,I must not suffer this indignity again.\par
\par
3-bad_hand=shy,I don't want to lose again...\par
\par
3-bad_hand=angry,I won't stand for this humiliation! I will make whoever wins this hand suffer!\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang9\par
\par
#lost 4 items\par
4-good_hand=gloating,Weep, fools! For now you lose!\par
4-good_hand=happy,I will enjoy your humiliation, fools.\par
4-good_hand=happy,These will suffice.\par
4-good_hand=gloating,Oh, now my opponents will taste defeat.\par
4-good_hand=gloating,I will enjoy seeing my inferior opponets undress!\par
4-good_hand=happy,How I love the taste of victory!\par
4-good_hand=gloating,I can't be defeated by the likes of you peons.\par
4-good_hand=gloating,I will be the only one clothed at the end of this.\par
4-good_hand=happy,I will win with this hand. How could I not?\par
4-good_hand=gloating,Let's see one of you strip for your princess.\par
4-good_hand=gloating,How I enjoy lording my success over fools like all of you.\par
4-good_hand=happy,Wondeful! More success for me!\par
4-good_hand=gloating,How great am I?\par
4-good_hand=gloating,These cards are worthy of me.\par
4-okay_hand=calm,It's not quite good enough for me.\par
4-okay_hand=shy,It's not like I wanted better cards or anything.\par
4-okay_hand=calm,It will suffice.\par
4-okay_hand=shy,Not quite worthy of my beauty.\par
4-okay_hand=calm,These cards are not good enough for my greatness.\par
4-okay_hand=calm,This hand is alright. Not good enough for me, but not bad.\par
4-okay_hand=calm,These cards are decent enough.\par
4-okay_hand=calm,Hmmm, okay then. It's not like I care.\par
4-okay_hand=calm,Well, I've seen better cards...\par
4-okay_hand=calm,Hmph...\par
4-okay_hand=calm,Not quite up to par for me.\par
4-okay_hand=calm,I need better cards, but I have had worse...\par
4-okay_hand=calm,I need something a little better than these.\par
4-okay_hand=calm,Give me better cards than these, Dealer.\par
4-okay_hand=calm,I want better cards than these... Give them to me....\par
4-okay_hand=strip,I need something  better than these. I'll give you a peek if you cheat for me.\par
4-bad_hand=angry,Who is cheating me out of getting good cards?!\par
4-bad_hand=angry,Curse you! I will have my revenge!\par
4-bad_hand=angry,The dealer will suffer the wrath of princess Riva!\par

\pard\lang1033 4-bad_hand=shy,Not this...\par
\par
4-bad_hand=angry,These cards are beneath me.\par
\par
4-bad_hand=shy,I will have my revenge for this.\par
\par
4-bad_hand=shy,These cards are worse than Zizou's ugly two-tone hair.\par
\par
4-bad_hand=loss,I DON'T WANT TO GET NAKED!\par
\par
4-bad_hand=loss,B-But I don't wanna strip...\par
\par
4-bad_hand=shy,I'm about ot lose due to these horrid cards...\par
\par
4-bad_hand=angry,Curses! I will take revenge on whoever wins this hand.\par
\par
4-bad_hand=angry,Damn you all.\par
\par
4-bad_hand=loss,I will take my revenge on you all! \par
\par
4-bad_hand=shy,I must not suffer this indignity again.\par
\par
4-bad_hand=shy,I don't want to lose again...\par
\par
4-bad_hand=angry,I won't stand for this humiliation! I will make whoever wins this hand suffer!\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang9\par
\par
#lost 5 items\par
5-good_hand=gloating,My, my... All of you will soon suffer the humiliation of defeat!\par
5-good_hand=happy,All of you! Prepare to suffer defeat!\par
5-good_hand=happy,These will suffice.\par
5-good_hand=gloating,Oh, now my opponents will taste defeat.\par
5-good_hand=gloating,I will enjoy seeing my inferior opponets undress!\par
5-good_hand=happy,How I love the taste of victory!\par
5-good_hand=gloating,I can't be defeated by the likes of you peons.\par
5-good_hand=gloating,I will be the only one clothed at the end of this.\par
5-good_hand=happy,I will win with this hand. How could I not?\par
5-good_hand=gloating,Let's see one of you strip for your princess.\par
5-good_hand=gloating,How I enjoy lording my success over fools like all of you.\par
5-good_hand=happy,Wondeful! More success for me!\par
5-good_hand=gloating,How great am I?\par
5-good_hand=gloating,These cards are worthy of me.\par
5-okay_hand=calm,It will suffice.\par
5-okay_hand=shy,Not quite worthy of my beauty.\par
5-okay_hand=calm,It will suffice.\par
5-okay_hand=shy,Not quite worthy of my beauty.\par
5-okay_hand=calm,These cards are not good enough for my greatness.\par
5-okay_hand=calm,This hand is alright. Not good enough for me, but not bad.\par
5-okay_hand=calm,These cards are decent enough.\par
5-okay_hand=calm,Hmmm, okay then. It's not like I care.\par
5-okay_hand=calm,Well, I've seen better cards...\par
5-okay_hand=calm,Hmph...\par
5-okay_hand=calm,Not quite up to par for me.\par
5-okay_hand=calm,I need better cards, but I have had worse...\par
5-okay_hand=calm,I need something a little better than these.\par
5-okay_hand=calm,Give me better cards than these, Dealer.\par
5-okay_hand=calm,I want better cards than these... Give them to me....\par
5-okay_hand=strip,I need something  better than these. I'll give you a peek if you cheat for me.\par
5-bad_hand=angry,How dare you, Dealer?\par
5-bad_hand=angry,The dealer will suffer the wrath of princess Riva!\par
5-bad_hand=angry,The dealer will suffer the wrath of princess Riva!\par

\pard\lang1033 5-bad_hand=shy,Not this...\par
\par
5-bad_hand=angry,These cards are beneath me.\par
\par
5-bad_hand=shy,I will have my revenge for this.\par
\par
5-bad_hand=shy,These cards are worse than Zizou's ugly two-tone hair.\par
\par
5-bad_hand=loss,I DON'T WANT TO GET NAKED!\par
\par
5-bad_hand=loss,B-But I don't wanna strip...\par
\par
5-bad_hand=shy,I'm about ot lose due to these horrid cards...\par
\par
5-bad_hand=angry,Curses! I will take revenge on whoever wins this hand.\par
\par
5-bad_hand=angry,Damn you all.\par
\par
5-bad_hand=loss,I will take my revenge on you all! \par
\par
5-bad_hand=shy,I must not suffer this indignity again.\par
\par
5-bad_hand=shy,I don't want to lose again...\par
\par
5-bad_hand=angry,I won't stand for this humiliation! I will make whoever wins this hand suffer!\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang9\par
\par
#lost all clothing\par
-3-good_hand=gloating,Now! I will take my revenge!\par
-3-good_hand=interested,This is where I turn it all around!\par
-3-good_hand=happy,These will suffice.\par
-3-good_hand=gloating,Oh, now my opponents will taste defeat.\par
-3-good_hand=gloating,I will enjoy seeing my inferior opponets undress!\par
-3-good_hand=happy,How I love the taste of victory!\par
-3-good_hand=gloating,I can't be defeated by the likes of you peons.\par
-3-good_hand=gloating,I will be the only one clothed at the end of this.\par
-3-good_hand=happy,I will win with this hand. How could I not?\par
-3-good_hand=gloating,Let's see one of you strip for your princess.\par
-3-good_hand=gloating,How I enjoy lording my success over fools like all of you.\par
-3-good_hand=happy,Wondeful! More success for me!\par
-3-good_hand=gloating,How great am I?\par
-3-good_hand=gloating,These cards are worthy of me.\par
-3-okay_hand=shy,Don't fail me now.\par
-3-okay_hand=shy,I won't fail. I can't fail.\par
-3-okay_hand=calm,It will suffice.\par
-3-okay_hand=shy,Not quite worthy of my beauty.\par
-3-okay_hand=calm,These cards are not good enough for my greatness.\par
-3-okay_hand=calm,This hand is alright. Not good enough for me, but not bad.\par
-3-okay_hand=calm,These cards are decent enough.\par
-3-okay_hand=calm,Hmmm, okay then. It's not like I care.\par
-3-okay_hand=calm,Well, I've seen better cards...\par
-3-okay_hand=calm,Hmph...\par
-3-okay_hand=calm,Not quite up to par for me.\par
-3-okay_hand=calm,I need better cards, but I have had worse...\par
-3-okay_hand=calm,I need something a little better than these.\par
-3-okay_hand=calm,Give me better cards than these, Dealer.\par
-3-okay_hand=calm,I want better cards than these... Give them to me....\par
-3-okay_hand=horny,I need something  better than these. I'll give you a show if you cheat for me.\par
-3-bad_hand=embarrassed,No... Not now... Please...\par
-3-bad_hand=embarrassed,NO! NO! NO! I DON'T DESRVE THIS!\par
-3-bad_hand=angry,The dealer will suffer the wrath of princess Riva!\par

\pard\lang1033 -3-bad_hand=shy,Not this...\par
\par
-3-bad_hand=angry,These cards are beneath me.\par
\par
-3-bad_hand=shy,I will have my revenge for this.\par
\par
-3-bad_hand=shy,These cards are worse than Zizou's ugly two-tone hair.\par
\par
-3-bad_hand=loss,I DON'T WANT TO GET NAKED!\par
\par
-3-bad_hand=loss,B-But I don't wanna strip...\par
\par
-3-bad_hand=shy,I'm about ot lose due to these horrid cards...\par
\par
-3-bad_hand=angry,Curses! I will take revenge on whoever wins this hand.\par
\par
-3-bad_hand=angry,Damn you all.\par
\par
-3-bad_hand=loss,I will take my revenge on you all! \par
\par
-3-bad_hand=shy,I must not suffer this indignity again.\par
\par
-3-bad_hand=shy,I don't want to lose again...\par
\par
-3-bad_hand=angry,I won't stand for this humiliation! I will make whoever wins this hand suffer!\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang9\par
\par
\par
#SELF STRIPPING\par
#This is the character says once they've lost a hand, but before they strip.\par
\par
#losing necklace\par
0-must_strip_winning=loss,It's just my necklace. I'm still in the lead.\par
0-must_strip_winning=loss,Enjoy this, for I will not strip again!\par
0-must_strip_winning=loss,Curses. I will see this returned to me after the game.\par
0-must_strip_normal=loss,My necklace... I won't remove more than this...\par
0-must_strip_normal=loss,I curse all who enjoy this.\par
0-must_strip_normal=loss,A momentary setback. I will not be defeated so easily.\par
0-must_strip_losing=loss,I-It's not like I want to strip for you or anything, ~player~! I-Idiot...\par
0-must_strip_losing=loss,NO! I WILL NOT! I-I-I... I must if I want to win...\par
0-must_strip_losing=loss,No... I don't deserve this humiliation...\par
0-must_strip_winning=loss,As long as I win, nothing else matters.\par
0-must_strip_normal=loss,I will not lose! This is but a momentary setback!\par
0-must_strip_losing=loss,Another failure?! I shame Razil with every loss...\par
0-must_strip_winning=loss,Every victory is a victory for Razil. I must remember that and push forward.\par
0-must_strip_normal=loss,Must I be shamed in front of all of you?\par
0-must_strip_losing=loss,Damn... Why must I, the great Princess Riva, Suffer such embarrassment?\par
0-must_strip_winning=loss,One step back but I am still three steps ahead!\par
0-must_strip_normal=loss,My misfortune is almost as great as mt beauty.\par
0-must_strip_losing=angry,Damn this game! All of you must have cheated!\par
0-stripping=strip,M-Must I..?\par
1-stripped=stripped,There... Take my necklace, you perverted idiots...\par
\par
#losing shoes\par
1-must_strip_winning=loss,It's just my shoes... I will make it up.\par
1-must_strip_winning=loss,As long as I win, I will play by the rules.\par
1-must_strip_winning=loss,I'm still winning. And we all no winning is all that matters.\par
1-must_strip_normal=loss,I should've cheated...\par
1-must_strip_normal=loss,(This is my fault for wearing this stupid dancer's disguise...)What?  I didn't say anything, idiot!\par
1-must_strip_normal=loss,Enjoy your momentary domination of me. I will repay the favour 100 times over when I win.\par
1-must_strip_losing=loss,I-It's not like I want to strip for you or anything, ~player~! I-Idiot...\par
1-must_strip_losing=loss,Next time, I should cheat...\par
1-must_strip_losing=loss,Curses. Not again. I'm too beautiful for this.\par
1-must_strip_winning=loss,As long as I win, nothing else matters.\par
1-must_strip_normal=loss,I will not lose! This is but a momentary setback!\par
1-must_strip_losing=loss,Another failure?! I shame Razil with every loss...\par
1-must_strip_winning=loss,Every victory is a victory for Razil. I must remember that and push forward.\par
1-must_strip_normal=loss,Must I be shamed in front of all of you?\par
1-must_strip_losing=loss,Damn... Why must I, the great Princess Riva, Suffer such embarrassment?\par
1-must_strip_winning=loss,One step back but I am still three steps ahead!\par
1-must_strip_normal=loss,My misfortune is almost as great as mt beauty.\par
1-must_strip_losing=angry,Damn this game! All of you must have cheated!\par
1-stripping=strip,Y-You perverted idiot! You're probobly enjoying this!\par
2-stripped=stripped,You must have a fetish for either feet or humiliation. I-Idiot...\par
\par
#losing gloves\par
2-must_strip_winning=loss,I will suffer this indignity for the sake of victory.\par
2-must_strip_winning=loss,I don't want to do this, but I will if it means I win.\par
2-must_strip_winning=loss,E-Enjoy it, ~player~, you perverted idiot! I will still win it all in the end!\par
2-must_strip_normal=loss,No. This is not good enough for me.\par
2-must_strip_normal=loss,I do not deserve this embarrassment...\par
2-must_strip_normal=loss,D_Don't enjoy this! I am royalty and you are just common trash!\par
2-must_strip_losing=loss,I-It's not like I want to strip for you or anything, ~player~! I-Idiot...\par
2-must_strip_losing=loss,NO! NO! NO! I ON'T DESERVE THIS! I DESERVE TO WIN! I'M BEAUTIFUL! NONE OF YOU DESERVE TO SEE ME NAKED!\par
2-must_strip_losing=loss,No... I am failing my country and my family...\par
2-must_strip_winning=loss,As long as I win, nothing else matters.\par
2-must_strip_normal=loss,I will not lose! This is but a momentary setback!\par
2-must_strip_losing=loss,Another failure?! I shame Razil with every loss...\par
2-must_strip_winning=loss,Every victory is a victory for Razil. I must remember that and push forward.\par
2-must_strip_normal=loss,Must I be shamed in front of all of you?\par
2-must_strip_losing=loss,Damn... Why must I, the great Princess Riva, Suffer such embarrassment?\par
2-must_strip_winning=loss,One step back but I am still three steps ahead!\par
2-must_strip_normal=loss,My misfortune is almost as great as mt beauty.\par
2-must_strip_losing=angry,Damn this game! All of you must have cheated!\par
2-stripping=strip,I forfeit my glove to you... Pervert...\par
3-stripped=stripped,There. Don't tell me you have a hand fetish too, you idiot pervert.\par
\par
#losing pants\par
3-must_strip_winning=loss,I'm still winning, I'm still winning, I'm still winning.\par
3-must_strip_winning=loss,I will endure this horrible humiliation. It is the price of victory.\par
3-must_strip_winning=loss,Must I suffer this humiliation again?\par
3-must_strip_normal=loss,Why me?! I'm better than everyone else here...\par
3-must_strip_normal=loss,Not me again... I'm shaming my family with every failure...\par
3-must_strip_normal=loss,Not my pants! Please?! Let me keep them?!\par
3-must_strip_losing=loss,I-It's not like I want to strip for you or anything, ~player~! I-Idiot...\par
3-must_strip_losing=loss,I will make a comeback. Even if I must use all the Syega I have.\par
3-must_strip_losing=loss,I'm far too good for all of you people! You should be stripping, not me!\par
3-must_strip_winning=loss,As long as I win, nothing else matters.\par
3-must_strip_normal=loss,I will not lose! This is but a momentary setback!\par
3-must_strip_losing=loss,Another failure?! I shame Razil with every loss...\par
3-must_strip_winning=loss,Every victory is a victory for Razil. I must remember that and push forward.\par
3-must_strip_normal=loss,Must I be shamed in front of all of you?\par
3-must_strip_losing=loss,Damn... Why must I, the great Princess Riva, Suffer such embarrassment?\par
3-must_strip_winning=loss,One step back but I am still three steps ahead!\par
3-must_strip_normal=loss,My misfortune is almost as great as mt beauty.\par
3-must_strip_losing=angry,Damn this game! All of you must have cheated!\par
3-stripping=strip,I will comply... You disgusting perverts.\par
4-stripped=stripped,Happy now... Pervert...\par
\par
#losing top\par
4-must_strip_winning=loss,Not this... Please...\par
4-must_strip_winning=loss,B-But... I don't want to bare my bosoms...\par
4-must_strip_winning=loss,Not this! Anything but this!\par
4-must_strip_normal=loss,WAAAAH! I DON'T WANT TO SHOW MY ROYAL BOOBIES TO EVERYONE!\par
4-must_strip_normal=loss,P-Prepare yourselves to see a princess' nipples...\par
4-must_strip_normal=loss,Not my little boobies! Please let me keep my top?! Please?!\par
4-must_strip_losing=loss,I-It's not like I want to strip for you or anything, ~player~! I-Idiot...\par
4-must_strip_losing=loss,I... I have to take my top off, don't I? I thoughtas much...\par
4-must_strip_losing=loss,Curse you, Zizou Olympia... Somehow, this is your fault...\par
4-must_strip_winning=loss,As long as I win, nothing else matters.4-must_strip_normal=loss,I will not lose! This is but a momentary setback!\par
4-must_strip_losing=loss,Another failure?! I shame Razil with every loss...\par
4-must_strip_winning=loss,Every victory is a victory for Razil. I must remember that and push forward.\par
4-must_strip_normal=loss,Must I be shamed in front of all of you?\par
4-must_strip_losing=loss,Damn... Why must I, the great Princess Riva, Suffer such embarrassment?\par
4-must_strip_winning=loss,One step back but I am still three steps ahead!\par
4-must_strip_normal=loss,My misfortune is almost as great as mt beauty.\par
4-must_strip_losing=angry,Damn this game! All of you must have cheated!\par
4-stripping=strip,I will comply with your rules. If only to haveone last chance at victory.\par
5-stripped=stripped,I COMMAND EVERYONE TO LOOK AWAY NOW! NONE OF YOU MAY SEE THE ROYAL BOOBIES OF PRINCESS RIVA!\par
\par
#losing thong\par
5-must_strip_winning=loss,No... \par
5-must_strip_winning=loss,Damn my foul luck. I promise you all! I will take my revenge for this!\par
5-must_strip_winning=loss,I will not tolerate this humiliation! I will use force if I must!\par
5-must_strip_normal=loss,I must decline your offer to remove my last garment.\par
5-must_strip_normal=loss,No. I don't want to strip off my final piece of clothing.\par
5-must_strip_normal=loss,I refuse this indignity!\par
5-must_strip_losing=loss,I-It's not like I want to strip for you or anything, ~player~! I-Idiot...\par
5-must_strip_losing=loss,I don't care who you think you are! I will NOT get naked for you!\par
5-must_strip_losing=loss,Sorry, but I'm gonna pass on the whole nudity thing.\par
5-must_strip_winning=loss,As long as I win, nothing else matters.\par
5-must_strip_normal=loss,I will not lose! This is but a momentary setback!\par
5-must_strip_losing=loss,Another failure?! I shame Razil with every loss...\par
5-must_strip_winning=loss,Every victory is a victory for Razil. I must remember that and push forward.\par
5-must_strip_normal=loss,Must I be shamed in front of all of you?\par
5-must_strip_losing=loss,Damn... Why must I, the great Princess Riva, Suffer such embarrassment?\par
5-must_strip_winning=loss,One step back but I am still three steps ahead!\par
5-must_strip_normal=loss,My misfortune is almost as great as mt beauty.\par
5-must_strip_losing=angry,Damn this game! All of you must have cheated!\par
5-stripping=strip,No. I refuse to expose my vagina to the world. None of you have any right to see my- HEY! NO! LET GO OF MY THONG! NO! \par
6-stripped=stripped,You... Pervert. How dare you..? I don't deserve to be treated so roughly.\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
#OPPONENT MUST STRIP\par
#These lines are spoken when an opponent must strip, but the character does not yet know what they will take off.\par
#Writing different variations is important here, as these lines will be spoken about thirty times per game.\par
#The "human" versions of the lines will only be spoken if the human player is stripping.\par
\par
#stage-generic lines that will be used for every individual stage that doesn't have a line written\par
\par
male_human_must_strip=interested,What they say to a male player who has lost a round\par
male_must_strip=interested,What they say to a male NPC who has lost a round\par
female_human_must_strip=interested,What they say to a female player who has lost a round\par
female_must_strip=interested,What they say to a female NPC who has lost a round\par
\par
#stage-specific lines that override the stage-generic ones\par
\par
#fully clothed\par
0-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
0-male_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
0-male_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
0-male_must_strip=gloating,Oh, ~name~. This must be SO embarrassing for you.\par
0-male_must_strip=interested,What a humiliating situation to be in. I love it.\par
0-male_must_strip=horny,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, pet.\par
0-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
0-female_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
0-female_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
0-female_must_strip=gloating,What's the matter, ~name~? afraid to show me some skin?\par
0-female_must_strip=interested,Time to expose yourself for my amusement.\par
0-female_must_strip=horny,I am going to enjoy seeing you without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
0-female_must_strip,target:zizou=gloating,Zizou... You have to kae off your female_must_masturbate=gloating? wonderful.\par
0-female_must_strip,target:zizou=horny,How shameful, zizou. Stripping of your female_must_masturbate=gloating isn't very becoming of a goddess.\par
0-female_must_strip,target:sola=gloating,Little Sola has to take off her female_must_masturbate=gloating? how delicious.\par
0-female_must_strip,target:sola=horny,If you're removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, Sola, you must not have too much left.\par
0-female_must_strip,target:blad=gloating,Yes, Blad. Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for me.\par
0-female_must_strip,target:blad=horny,You appear very excited to remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad.\par
0-male_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
0-male_must_strip=gloating,I will enjoy seeing you lose, ~name.\par
0-female_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
0-female_must_strip=gloating,OHOHOHO! You must strip now, ~name~!\par
0-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
0-male_must_strip=gloating,Strip, boy. Your princess commands you.\par
0-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
0-female_must_strip=gloating,Undress for your ruler, little girl.\par
0-male_human_must_strip=gloating,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
0-male_must_strip=gloating,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
0-female_human_must_strip=gloating,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
0-female_must_strip=gloating,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
\par
\par
#lost necklace\par
1-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
1-male_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
1-male_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
1-male_must_strip=gloating,Oh, ~name~. This must be SO embarrassing for you.\par
1-male_must_strip=interested,What a humiliating situation to be in. I love it.\par
1-male_must_strip=horny,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, pet.\par
1-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
1-female_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
1-female_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
1-female_must_strip=gloating,What's the matter, ~name~? afraid to show me some skin?\par
1-female_must_strip=interested,Time to expose yourself for my amusement.\par
1-female_must_strip=horny,I am going to enjoy seeing you without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
1-female_must_strip,target:zizou=gloating,Zizou... You have to kae off your female_must_masturbate=gloating? wonderful.\par
1-female_must_strip,target:zizou=horny,How shameful, zizou. Stripping of your female_must_masturbate=gloating isn't very becoming of a goddess.\par
1-female_must_strip,target:sola=gloating,Little Sola has to take off her female_must_masturbate=gloating? how delicious.\par
1-female_must_strip,target:sola=horny,If you're removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, Sola, you must not have too much left.\par
1-female_must_strip,target:blad=gloating,Yes, Blad. Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for me.\par
1-female_must_strip,target:blad=horny,You appear very excited to remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad.\par
1-male_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
1-male_must_strip=gloating,I will enjoy seeing you lose, ~name.\par
1-female_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
1-female_must_strip=gloating,OHOHOHO! You must strip now, ~name~!\par
1-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
1-male_must_strip=gloating,Strip, boy. Your princess commands you.\par
1-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
1-female_must_strip=gloating,Undress for your ruler, little girl.\par
1-male_human_must_strip=interested,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
1-male_must_strip=horny,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
1-female_human_must_strip=interested,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
1-female_must_strip=horny,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
\par
\par
#lost shoes\par
2-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
2-male_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
2-male_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
2-male_must_strip=gloating,Oh, ~name~. This must be SO embarrassing for you.\par
2-male_must_strip=interested,What a humiliating situation to be in. I love it.\par
2-male_must_strip=horny,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, pet.\par
2-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
2-female_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
2-female_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
2-female_must_strip=gloating,What's the matter, ~name~? afraid to show me some skin?\par
2-female_must_strip=interested,Time to expose yourself for my amusement.\par
2-female_must_strip=horny,I am going to enjoy seeing you without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
2-female_must_strip,target:zizou=gloating,Zizou... You have to kae off your female_must_masturbate=gloating? wonderful.\par
2-female_must_strip,target:zizou=horny,How shameful, zizou. Stripping of your female_must_masturbate=gloating isn't very becoming of a goddess.\par
2-female_must_strip,target:sola=gloating,Little Sola has to take off her female_must_masturbate=gloating? how delicious.\par
2-female_must_strip,target:sola=horny,If you're removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, Sola, you must not have too much left.\par
2-female_must_strip,target:blad=gloating,Yes, Blad. Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for me.\par
2-female_must_strip,target:blad=horny,You appear very excited to remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad.\par
2-male_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
2-male_must_strip=gloating,I will enjoy seeing you lose, ~name.\par
2-female_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
2-female_must_strip=gloating,OHOHOHO! You must strip now, ~name~!\par
2-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
2-male_must_strip=gloating,Strip, boy. Your princess commands you.\par
2-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
2-female_must_strip=gloating,Undress for your ruler, little girl.\par
2-male_human_must_strip=interested,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
2-male_must_strip=horny,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
2-female_human_must_strip=interested,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
2-female_must_strip=horny,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
\par
#lost gloves\par
3-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
3-male_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
3-male_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
3-male_must_strip=gloating,Oh, ~name~. This must be SO embarrassing for you.\par
3-male_must_strip=interested,What a humiliating situation to be in. I love it.\par
3-male_must_strip=horny,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, pet.\par
3-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
3-female_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
3-female_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
3-female_must_strip=gloating,What's the matter, ~name~? afraid to show me some skin?\par
3-female_must_strip=interested,Time to expose yourself for my amusement.\par
3-female_must_strip=horny,I am going to enjoy seeing you without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
3-female_must_strip,target:zizou=gloating,Zizou... You have to kae off your female_must_masturbate=gloating? wonderful.\par
3-female_must_strip,target:zizou=horny,How shameful, zizou. Stripping of your female_must_masturbate=gloating isn't very becoming of a goddess.\par
3-female_must_strip,target:sola=gloating,Little Sola has to take off her female_must_masturbate=gloating? how delicious.\par
3-female_must_strip,target:sola=horny,If you're removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, Sola, you must not have too much left.\par
3-female_must_strip,target:blad=gloating,Yes, Blad. Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for me.\par
3-female_must_strip,target:blad=horny,You appear very excited to remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad.\par
3-male_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
3-male_must_strip=gloating,I will enjoy seeing you lose, ~name.\par
3-female_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
3-female_must_strip=gloating,OHOHOHO! You must strip now, ~name~!\par
3-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
3-male_must_strip=gloating,Strip, boy. Your princess commands you.\par
3-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
3-female_must_strip=gloating,Undress for your ruler, little girl.\par
3-male_human_must_strip=interested,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
3-male_must_strip=horny,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
3-female_human_must_strip=interested,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
3-female_must_strip=horny,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
\par
#lost pants\par
4-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
4-male_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
4-male_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
4-male_must_strip=gloating,Oh, ~name~. This must be SO embarrassing for you.\par
4-male_must_strip=interested,What a humiliating situation to be in. I love it.\par
4-male_must_strip=horny,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, pet.\par
4-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
4-female_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
4-female_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
4-female_must_strip=gloating,What's the matter, ~name~? afraid to show me some skin?\par
4-female_must_strip=interested,Time to expose yourself for my amusement.\par
4-female_must_strip=horny,I am going to enjoy seeing you without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
4-female_must_strip,target:zizou=gloating,Zizou... You have to kae off your female_must_masturbate=gloating? wonderful.\par
4-female_must_strip,target:zizou=horny,How shameful, zizou. Stripping of your female_must_masturbate=gloating isn't very becoming of a goddess.\par
4-female_must_strip,target:sola=gloating,Little Sola has to take off her female_must_masturbate=gloating? how delicious.\par
4-female_must_strip,target:sola=horny,If you're removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, Sola, you must not have too much left.\par
4-female_must_strip,target:blad=gloating,Yes, Blad. Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for me.\par
4-female_must_strip,target:blad=horny,You appear very excited to remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad.\par
4-male_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
4-male_must_strip=gloating,I will enjoy seeing you lose, ~name.\par
4-female_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
4-female_must_strip=gloating,OHOHOHO! You must strip now, ~name~!\par
4-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
4-male_must_strip=gloating,Strip, boy. Your princess commands you.\par
4-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
4-female_must_strip=gloating,Undress for your ruler, little girl.\par
4-male_human_must_strip=interested,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
4-male_must_strip=horny,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
4-female_human_must_strip=interested,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
4-female_must_strip=horny,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
\par
#lost top\par
5-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
5-male_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
5-male_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
5-male_must_strip=gloating,Oh, ~name~. This must be SO embarrassing for you.\par
5-male_must_strip=interested,What a humiliating situation to be in. I love it.\par
5-male_must_strip=horny,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, pet.\par
5-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
5-female_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
5-female_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
5-female_must_strip=gloating,What's the matter, ~name~? afraid to show me some skin?\par
5-female_must_strip=interested,Time to expose yourself for my amusement.\par
5-female_must_strip=horny,I am going to enjoy seeing you without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
5-female_must_strip,target:zizou=gloating,Zizou... You have to kae off your female_must_masturbate=gloating? wonderful.\par
5-female_must_strip,target:zizou=horny,How shameful, zizou. Stripping of your female_must_masturbate=gloating isn't very becoming of a goddess.\par
5-female_must_strip,target:sola=gloating,Little Sola has to take off her female_must_masturbate=gloating? how delicious.\par
5-female_must_strip,target:sola=horny,If you're removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, Sola, you must not have too much left.\par
5-female_must_strip,target:blad=gloating,Yes, Blad. Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for me.\par
5-female_must_strip,target:blad=horny,You appear very excited to remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad.\par
5-male_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
5-male_must_strip=gloating,I will enjoy seeing you lose, ~name.\par
5-female_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
5-female_must_strip=gloating,OHOHOHO! You must strip now, ~name~!\par
5-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
5-male_must_strip=gloating,Strip, boy. Your princess commands you.\par
5-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
5-female_must_strip=gloating,Undress for your ruler, little girl.\par
5-male_human_must_strip=interested,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
5-male_must_strip=horny,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
5-female_human_must_strip=interested,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
5-female_must_strip=horny,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
\par
#lost all clothing items\par
-3-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
-3-male_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
-3-male_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
-3-male_must_strip=gloating,Oh, ~name~. This must be SO embarrassing for you.\par
-3-male_must_strip=interested,What a humiliating situation to be in. I love it.\par
-3-male_must_strip=horny,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, pet.\par
-3-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
-3-female_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
-3-female_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
-3-female_must_strip=gloating,What's the matter, ~name~? afraid to show me some skin?\par
-3-female_must_strip=interested,Time to expose yourself for my amusement.\par
-3-female_must_strip=horny,I am going to enjoy seeing you without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
-3-female_must_strip,target:zizou=gloating,Zizou... You have to kae off your female_must_masturbate=gloating? wonderful.\par
-3-female_must_strip,target:zizou=horny,How shameful, zizou. Stripping of your female_must_masturbate=gloating isn't very becoming of a goddess.\par
-3-female_must_strip,target:sola=gloating,Little Sola has to take off her female_must_masturbate=gloating? how delicious.\par
-3-female_must_strip,target:sola=horny,If you're removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, Sola, you must not have too much left.\par
-3-female_must_strip,target:blad=gloating,Yes, Blad. Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for me.\par
-3-female_must_strip,target:blad=horny,You appear very excited to remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad.\par
-3-male_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
-3-male_must_strip=gloating,I will enjoy seeing you lose, ~name.\par
-3-female_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
-3-female_must_strip=gloating,OHOHOHO! You must strip now, ~name~!\par
-3-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
-3-male_must_strip=gloating,Strip, boy. Your princess commands you.\par
-3-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
-3-female_must_strip=gloating,Undress for your ruler, little girl.\par
-3-male_human_must_strip=interested,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
-3-male_must_strip=horny,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
-3-female_human_must_strip=interested,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
-3-female_must_strip=horny,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
\par
#masturbating\par
-2-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
-2-male_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
-2-male_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
-2-male_must_strip=gloating,Oh, ~name~. This must be SO embarrassing for you.\par
-2-male_must_strip=interested,What a humiliating situation to be in. I love it.\par
-2-male_must_strip=horny,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, pet.\par
-2-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
-2-female_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
-2-female_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
-2-female_must_strip=gloating,What's the matter, ~name~? afraid to show me some skin?\par
-2-female_must_strip=interested,Time to expose yourself for my amusement.\par
-2-female_must_strip=horny,I am going to enjoy seeing you without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
-2-female_must_strip,target:zizou=gloating,Zizou... You have to kae off your female_must_masturbate=gloating? wonderful.\par
-2-female_must_strip,target:zizou=horny,How shameful, zizou. Stripping of your female_must_masturbate=gloating isn't very becoming of a goddess.\par
-2-female_must_strip,target:sola=gloating,Little Sola has to take off her female_must_masturbate=gloating? how delicious.\par
-2-female_must_strip,target:sola=horny,If you're removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, Sola, you must not have too much left.\par
-2-female_must_strip,target:blad=gloating,Yes, Blad. Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for me.\par
-2-female_must_strip,target:blad=horny,You appear very excited to remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad.\par
-2-male_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
-2-male_must_strip=gloating,I will enjoy seeing you lose, ~name.\par
-2-female_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
-2-female_must_strip=gloating,OHOHOHO! You must strip now, ~name~!\par
-2-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
-2-male_must_strip=gloating,Strip, boy. Your princess commands you.\par
-2-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
-2-female_must_strip=gloating,Undress for your ruler, little girl.\par
-2-male_human_must_strip=interested,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
-2-male_must_strip=horny,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
-2-female_human_must_strip=interested,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
-2-female_must_strip=horny,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
\par
#finished\par
-1-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
-1-male_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
-1-male_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
-1-male_must_strip=gloating,Oh, ~name~. This must be SO embarrassing for you.\par
-1-male_must_strip=interested,What a humiliating situation to be in. I love it.\par
-1-male_must_strip=horny,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, pet.\par
-1-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Strip, ~player~. I command it.\par
-1-female_human_must_strip=interested,How cute. ~player~ has to undress for me.\par
-1-female_human_must_strip=horny,~player~. Your face has never been cuter than how it is now.\par
-1-female_must_strip=gloating,What's the matter, ~name~? afraid to show me some skin?\par
-1-female_must_strip=interested,Time to expose yourself for my amusement.\par
-1-female_must_strip=horny,I am going to enjoy seeing you without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
-1-female_must_strip,target:zizou=gloating,Zizou... You have to kae off your female_must_masturbate=gloating? wonderful.\par
-1-female_must_strip,target:zizou=horny,How shameful, zizou. Stripping of your female_must_masturbate=gloating isn't very becoming of a goddess.\par
-1-female_must_strip,target:sola=gloating,Little Sola has to take off her female_must_masturbate=gloating? how delicious.\par
-1-female_must_strip,target:sola=horny,If you're removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating now, Sola, you must not have too much left.\par
-1-female_must_strip,target:blad=gloating,Yes, Blad. Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for me.\par
-1-female_must_strip,target:blad=horny,You appear very excited to remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad.\par
-1-male_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
-1-male_must_strip=gloating,I will enjoy seeing you lose, ~name.\par
-1-female_human_must_strip=gloating,You are losing everything, ~player~!\par
-1-female_must_strip=gloating,OHOHOHO! You must strip now, ~name~!\par
-1-male_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
-1-male_must_strip=gloating,Strip, boy. Your princess commands you.\par
-1-female_human_must_strip=gloating,Poor, little ~player~... Now you have to take off your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
-1-female_must_strip=gloating,Undress for your ruler, little girl.\par
-1-male_human_must_strip=interested,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
-1-male_must_strip=horny,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
-1-female_human_must_strip=interested,And now, you lose your female_must_masturbate=gloating, my pet. How delicious.\par
-1-female_must_strip=horny,Now, my pet... Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating for your mistress\par
\par
\par
\par
#OPPONENT REMOVING ACCESSORY\par
\par
#stage-specific lines that override the stage-generic ones\par
\par
##another character is removing accessories\par
#fully clothed\par
0-male_removing_accessory=gloating,I am simply DYING to see this.\par
0-male_removed_accessory=happy,Good show, ~name~.\par
0-male_removing_accessory=gloating,I command you to disrobe, ~name~.\par
0-male_removed_accessory=happy,Very good, pet.\par
0-female_removing_accessory=interested,I will savour this moment of humiliation.\par
0-female_removing_accessory=gloating,Wonderful, ~name~. I will enjoy this.\par
0-female_removed_accessory=gloating, What's wrong, ~name~? Afraid of losing again?\par
0-female_removed_accessory=happy,Your face is turning red with humiliation. I like it.\par
0-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=happy,Oh, Zizou. Losing your female_must_masturbate=gloating already?\par
0-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=interested,Little Sola is stripping? Wonderful.\par
0-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=interested,I enjoy seeing you undress, Blad. You give such an erotic show.\par
0-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=gloating,Strip for me, Zizou! I enjoy seeing you suffer such humiliation!\par
0-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=gloating,Sola. When you remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, give it to me. I want to make you beg for it back.\par
0-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=shocked,Such showmanship! I am very impressed, Blad.\par
0-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=gloating,Feeling a little exposed, Zizou? I enjoy seeing your face contort in shame and humiliation!\par
0-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=horny,You're much sexier than I gave you credit for, Sola.\par
0-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=interested,Thanks for the show, Blad.\par
0-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=happy,How I enjoy seeing you shamed, Zizou.\par
0-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=gloating,How cute! You're showing me so much, sola.\par
0-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=horny,You're making me so wet, Blad.\par
0-male_removing_accessory=gloating,OHOHOHOHOHO!!! Removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating alread?\par
0-male_removed_accessory=happy,What a sensual sight...\par
0-female_removing_accessory=gloating,Stripping your female_must_masturbate=gloating off?\par
0-female_removing_accessory=happy,You didn't need it anyway...\par
0-male_removing_accessory=interested,Well, well, well... Taking your female_must_masturbate=gloating off, ~name~?\par
0-male_removed_accessory=horny,Good. I want to see you strip.\par
0-female_removing_accessory=interested,How erotic... You're taking off your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~?\par
0-female_removing_accessory=horny,Oh, yes... That's what I want to see...\par
0-male_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
0-male_removed_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
0-female_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
0-female_removing_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
\par
\par
\par
#lost necklace\par
1-male_removing_accessory=gloating,I am simply DYING to see this.\par
1-male_removed_accessory=happy,Good show, ~name~.\par
1-male_removing_accessory=gloating,I command you to disrobe, ~name~.\par
1-male_removed_accessory=happy,Very good, pet.\par
1-female_removing_accessory=interested,I will savour this moment of humiliation.\par
1-female_removing_accessory=gloating,Wonderful, ~name~. I will enjoy this.\par
1-female_removed_accessory=gloating, What's wrong, ~name~? Afraid of losing again?\par
1-female_removed_accessory=happy,Your face is turning red with humiliation. I like it.\par
1-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=happy,Oh, Zizou. Losing your female_must_masturbate=gloating already?\par
1-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=interested,Little Sola is stripping? Wonderful.\par
1-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=interested,I enjoy seeing you undress, Blad. You give such an erotic show.\par
1-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=gloating,Strip for me, Zizou! I enjoy seeing you suffer such humiliation!\par
1-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=gloating,Sola. When you remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, give it to me. I want to make you beg for it back.\par
1-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=shocked,Such showmanship! I am very impressed, Blad.\par
1-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=gloating,Feeling a little exposed, Zizou? I enjoy seeing your face contort in shame and humiliation!\par
1-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=horny,You're much sexier than I gave you credit for, Sola.\par
1-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=interested,Thanks for the show, Blad.\par
1-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=happy,How I enjoy seeing you shamed, Zizou.\par
1-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=gloating,How cute! You're showing me so much, sola.\par
1-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=horny,You're making me so wet, Blad.\par
1-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=happy,How I enjoy seeing you shamed, Zizou.\par
1-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=gloating,How cute! You're showing me so much, sola.\par
1-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=horny,You're making me so wet, Blad.\par
1-male_removing_accessory=gloating,OHOHOHOHOHO!!! Removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating alread?\par
1-male_removed_accessory=happy,What a sensual sight...\par
1-female_removing_accessory=gloating,Stripping your female_must_masturbate=gloating off?\par
1-female_removing_accessory=happy,You didn't need it anyway...\par
1-male_removing_accessory=interested,Well, well, well... Taking your female_must_masturbate=gloating off, ~name~?\par
1-male_removed_accessory=horny,Good. I want to see you strip.\par
1-female_removing_accessory=interested,How erotic... You're taking off your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~?\par
1-female_removing_accessory=horny,Oh, yes... That's what I want to see...\par
1-male_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
1-male_removed_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
1-female_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
1-female_removing_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
\par
#lost shoes\par
2-male_removing_accessory=gloating,I am simply DYING to see this.\par
2-male_removed_accessory=happy,Good show, ~name~.\par
2-male_removing_accessory=gloating,I command you to disrobe, ~name~.\par
2-male_removed_accessory=happy,Very good, pet.\par
2-female_removing_accessory=interested,I will savour this moment of humiliation.\par
2-female_removing_accessory=gloating,Wonderful, ~name~. I will enjoy this.\par
2-female_removed_accessory=gloating, What's wrong, ~name~? Afraid of losing again?\par
2-female_removed_accessory=happy,Your face is turning red with humiliation. I like it.\par
2-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=happy,Oh, Zizou. Losing your female_must_masturbate=gloating already?\par
2-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=interested,Little Sola is stripping? Wonderful.\par
2-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=interested,I enjoy seeing you undress, Blad. You give such an erotic show.\par
2-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=gloating,Strip for me, Zizou! I enjoy seeing you suffer such humiliation!\par
2-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=gloating,Sola. When you remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, give it to me. I want to make you beg for it back.\par
2-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=shocked,Such showmanship! I am very impressed, Blad.\par
2-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=gloating,Feeling a little exposed, Zizou? I enjoy seeing your face contort in shame and humiliation!\par
2-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=horny,You're much sexier than I gave you credit for, Sola.\par
2-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=interested,Thanks for the show, Blad.\par
2-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=happy,How I enjoy seeing you shamed, Zizou.\par
2-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=gloating,How cute! You're showing me so much, sola.\par
2-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=horny,You're making me so wet, Blad.\par
2-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=happy,How I enjoy seeing you shamed, Zizou.\par
2-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=gloating,How cute! You're showing me so much, sola.\par
2-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=horny,You're making me so wet, Blad.\par
2-male_removing_accessory=gloating,OHOHOHOHOHO!!! Removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating alread?\par
2-male_removed_accessory=happy,What a sensual sight...\par
2-female_removing_accessory=gloating,Stripping your female_must_masturbate=gloating off?\par
2-female_removing_accessory=happy,You didn't need it anyway...\par
2-male_removing_accessory=interested,Well, well, well... Taking your female_must_masturbate=gloating off, ~name~?\par
2-male_removed_accessory=horny,Good. I want to see you strip.\par
2-female_removing_accessory=interested,How erotic... You're taking off your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~?\par
2-female_removing_accessory=horny,Oh, yes... That's what I want to see...\par
2-male_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
2-male_removed_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
2-female_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
2-female_removing_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
\par
#lost gloves\par
3-male_removing_accessory=gloating,I am simply DYING to see this.\par
3-male_removed_accessory=happy,Good show, ~name~.\par
3-male_removing_accessory=gloating,I command you to disrobe, ~name~.\par
3-male_removed_accessory=happy,Very good, pet.\par
3-female_removing_accessory=interested,I will savour this moment of humiliation.\par
3-female_removing_accessory=gloating,Wonderful, ~name~. I will enjoy this.\par
3-female_removed_accessory=gloating, What's wrong, ~name~? Afraid of losing again?\par
3-female_removed_accessory=happy,Your face is turning red with humiliation. I like it.\par
3-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=happy,Oh, Zizou. Losing your female_must_masturbate=gloating already?\par
3-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=interested,Little Sola is stripping? Wonderful.\par
3-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=interested,I enjoy seeing you undress, Blad. You give such an erotic show.\par
3-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=gloating,Strip for me, Zizou! I enjoy seeing you suffer such humiliation!\par
3-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=gloating,Sola. When you remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, give it to me. I want to make you beg for it back.\par
3-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=shocked,Such showmanship! I am very impressed, Blad.\par
3-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=gloating,Feeling a little exposed, Zizou? I enjoy seeing your face contort in shame and humiliation!\par
3-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=horny,You're much sexier than I gave you credit for, Sola.\par
3-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=interested,Thanks for the show, Blad.\par
3-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=happy,How I enjoy seeing you shamed, Zizou.\par
3-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=gloating,How cute! You're showing me so much, sola.\par
3-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=horny,You're making me so wet, Blad.\par
3-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=happy,How I enjoy seeing you shamed, Zizou.\par
3-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=gloating,How cute! You're showing me so much, sola.\par
3-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=horny,You're making me so wet, Blad.\par
3-male_removing_accessory=gloating,OHOHOHOHOHO!!! Removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating alread?\par
3-male_removed_accessory=happy,What a sensual sight...\par
3-female_removing_accessory=gloating,Stripping your female_must_masturbate=gloating off?\par
3-female_removing_accessory=happy,You didn't need it anyway...\par
3-male_removing_accessory=interested,Well, well, well... Taking your female_must_masturbate=gloating off, ~name~?\par
3-male_removed_accessory=horny,Good. I want to see you strip.\par
3-female_removing_accessory=interested,How erotic... You're taking off your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~?\par
3-female_removing_accessory=horny,Oh, yes... That's what I want to see...\par
3-male_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
3-male_removed_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
3-female_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
3-female_removing_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
\par
#lost pants\par
4-male_removing_accessory=gloating,I am simply DYING to see this.\par
4-male_removed_accessory=happy,Good show, ~name~.\par
4-male_removing_accessory=gloating,I command you to disrobe, ~name~.\par
4-male_removed_accessory=happy,Very good, pet.\par
4-female_removing_accessory=interested,I will savour this moment of humiliation.\par
4-female_removing_accessory=gloating,Wonderful, ~name~. I will enjoy this.\par
4-female_removed_accessory=gloating, What's wrong, ~name~? Afraid of losing again?\par
4-female_removed_accessory=happy,Your face is turning red with humiliation. I like it.\par
4-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=happy,Oh, Zizou. Losing your female_must_masturbate=gloating already?\par
4-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=interested,Little Sola is stripping? Wonderful.\par
4-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=interested,I enjoy seeing you undress, Blad. You give such an erotic show.\par
4-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=gloating,Strip for me, Zizou! I enjoy seeing you suffer such humiliation!\par
4-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=gloating,Sola. When you remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, give it to me. I want to make you beg for it back.\par
4-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=shocked,Such showmanship! I am very impressed, Blad.\par
4-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=gloating,Feeling a little exposed, Zizou? I enjoy seeing your face contort in shame and humiliation!\par
4-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=horny,You're much sexier than I gave you credit for, Sola.\par
4-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=interested,Thanks for the show, Blad.\par
4-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=happy,How I enjoy seeing you shamed, Zizou.\par
4-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=gloating,How cute! You're showing me so much, sola.\par
4-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=horny,You're making me so wet, Blad.\par
4-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=happy,How I enjoy seeing you shamed, Zizou.\par
4-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=gloating,How cute! You're showing me so much, sola.\par
4-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=horny,You're making me so wet, Blad.\par
4-male_removing_accessory=gloating,OHOHOHOHOHO!!! Removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating alread?\par
4-male_removed_accessory=happy,What a sensual sight...\par
4-female_removing_accessory=gloating,Stripping your female_must_masturbate=gloating off?\par
4-female_removing_accessory=happy,You didn't need it anyway...\par
4-male_removing_accessory=interested,Well, well, well... Taking your female_must_masturbate=gloating off, ~name~?\par
4-male_removed_accessory=horny,Good. I want to see you strip.\par
4-female_removing_accessory=interested,How erotic... You're taking off your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~?\par
4-female_removing_accessory=horny,Oh, yes... That's what I want to see...\par
4-male_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
4-male_removed_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
4-female_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
4-female_removing_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
\par
#lost top\par
5-male_removing_accessory=gloating,I am simply DYING to see this.\par
5-male_removed_accessory=happy,Good show, ~name~.\par
5-male_removing_accessory=gloating,I command you to disrobe, ~name~.\par
5-male_removed_accessory=happy,Very good, pet.\par
5-female_removing_accessory=interested,I will savour this moment of humiliation.\par
5-female_removing_accessory=gloating,Wonderful, ~name~. I will enjoy this.\par
5-female_removed_accessory=gloating, What's wrong, ~name~? Afraid of losing again?\par
5-female_removed_accessory=happy,Your face is turning red with humiliation. I like it.\par
5-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=happy,Oh, Zizou. Losing your female_must_masturbate=gloating already?\par
5-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=interested,Little Sola is stripping? Wonderful.\par
5-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=interested,I enjoy seeing you undress, Blad. You give such an erotic show.\par
5-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=gloating,Strip for me, Zizou! I enjoy seeing you suffer such humiliation!\par
5-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=gloating,Sola. When you remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, give it to me. I want to make you beg for it back.\par
5-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=shocked,Such showmanship! I am very impressed, Blad.\par
5-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=gloating,Feeling a little exposed, Zizou? I enjoy seeing your face contort in shame and humiliation!\par
5-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=horny,You're much sexier than I gave you credit for, Sola.\par
5-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=interested,Thanks for the show, Blad.\par
5-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=happy,How I enjoy seeing you shamed, Zizou.\par
5-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=gloating,How cute! You're showing me so much, sola.\par
5-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=horny,You're making me so wet, Blad.\par
5-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=happy,How I enjoy seeing you shamed, Zizou.\par
5-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=gloating,How cute! You're showing me so much, sola.\par
5-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=horny,You're making me so wet, Blad.\par
5-male_removing_accessory=gloating,OHOHOHOHOHO!!! Removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating alread?\par
5-male_removed_accessory=happy,What a sensual sight...\par
5-female_removing_accessory=gloating,Stripping your female_must_masturbate=gloating off?\par
5-female_removing_accessory=happy,You didn't need it anyway...\par
5-male_removing_accessory=interested,Well, well, well... Taking your female_must_masturbate=gloating off, ~name~?\par
5-male_removed_accessory=horny,Good. I want to see you strip.\par
5-female_removing_accessory=interested,How erotic... You're taking off your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~?\par
5-female_removing_accessory=horny,Oh, yes... That's what I want to see...\par
5-male_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
5-male_removed_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
5-female_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
5-female_removing_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
\par
#nude\par
-3-male_removing_accessory=embarrassed,How are you only now just removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating?\par
-3-male_removed_accessory=embarrassed,I refuse to accept this indignity...\par
-3-male_removing_accessory=angry,YOU HAVE NO RIGHT TO REMOVE ONLY THAT WHEN I'M STANDING HERE NAKED!\par
-3-male_removed_accessory=angry,I command you to remove the rest of your clothing!\par
-3-female_removing_accessory=embarrassed,How has it come to this? You're just now taking off your female_must_masturbate=gloating and I'm totally nude.\par
-3-female_removing_accessory=embarrassed,How can I go home after suffering such humiliation...\par
-3-female_removed_accessory=angry,YOU ARE JUST NOW REMOVING YOUR female_must_masturbate=gloating? THIS CANNOT BE ALLOWED!\par
-3-female_removed_accessory=angry,I WILL TAKE MY REVENGE FOR THIS!\par
-3-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=interested,You will join me in nudity soon, Zizou.\par
-3-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=interested,How cute... You're making me wet, Sola. We'll have to get together after this.\par
-3-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=interested,Oh, Blad... You're sooo sexy...\par
-3-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=angry,THIS IS MY REVENGE! YOU WILL SOON JOIN ME IN HUMILIATION!\par
-3-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=angry,How are you only just now removing THAT, Sola?\par
-3-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=angry,You're just mocking me now, Aren't you, Blad?\par
-3-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=horny,Oh, Zizou... I will see your pussy soon...\par
-3-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=horny,Sola... When you remove so little, you turn me on so much...\par
-3-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=horny,I will trade you all the information I have to get you for one night, Blad.\par
-3-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=angry,I WILL have my revenge, Zizou!\par
-3-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=angry,I will take my revenge on you with a paddle, Sola.\par
-3-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=angry,HOW DARE YOU MOCK ME BY EXPOSING SO LITTLE?\par
-3-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=happy,How I enjoy seeing you shamed, Zizou.\par
-3-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=gloating,How cute! You're showing me so much, sola.\par
-3-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=horny,You're making me so wet, Blad.\par
-3-male_removing_accessory=gloating,OHOHOHOHOHO!!! Removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating alread?\par
-3-male_removed_accessory=happy,What a sensual sight...\par
-3-female_removing_accessory=gloating,Stripping your female_must_masturbate=gloating off?\par
-3-female_removing_accessory=happy,You didn't need it anyway...\par
-3-male_removing_accessory=interested,Well, well, well... Taking your female_must_masturbate=gloating off, ~name~?\par
-3-male_removed_accessory=horny,Good. I want to see you strip.\par
-3-female_removing_accessory=interested,How erotic... You're taking off your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~?\par
-3-female_removing_accessory=horny,Oh, yes... That's what I want to see...\par
-3-male_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
-3-male_removed_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
-3-female_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
-3-female_removing_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
\par
#masturbating\par
-2-male_removing_accessory=embarrassed,How are you only now just removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating?\par
-2-male_removed_accessory=embarrassed,I refuse to accept this indignity...\par
-2-male_removing_accessory=angry,YOU HAVE NO RIGHT TO REMOVE ONLY THAT WHEN I'M STANDING HERE NAKED!\par
-2-male_removed_accessory=angry,I command you to remove the rest of your clothing!\par
-2-female_removing_accessory=embarrassed,How has it come to this? You're just now taking off your female_must_masturbate=gloating and I'm totally nude.\par
-2-female_removing_accessory=embarrassed,How can I go home after suffering such humiliation...\par
-2-female_removed_accessory=angry,YOU ARE JUST NOW REMOVING YOUR female_must_masturbate=gloating? THIS CANNOT BE ALLOWED!\par
-2-female_removed_accessory=angry,I WILL TAKE MY REVENGE FOR THIS!\par
-2-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=interested,You will join me in nudity soon, Zizou.\par
-2-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=interested,How cute... You're making me wet, Sola. We'll have to get together after this.\par
-2-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=interested,Oh, Blad... You're sooo sexy...\par
-2-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=angry,THIS IS MY REVENGE! YOU WILL SOON JOIN ME IN HUMILIATION!\par
-2-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=angry,How are you only just now removing THAT, Sola?\par
-2-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=angry,You're just mocking me now, Aren't you, Blad?\par
-2-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=horny,Oh, Zizou... I will see your pussy soon...\par
-2-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=horny,Sola... When you remove so little, you turn me on so much...\par
-2-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=horny,I will trade you all the information I have to get you for one night, Blad.\par
-2-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=angry,I WILL have my revenge, Zizou!\par
-2-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=angry,I will take my revenge on you with a paddle, Sola.\par
-2-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=angry,HOW DARE YOU MOCK ME BY EXPOSING SO LITTLE?\par
-2-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=happy,How I enjoy seeing you shamed, Zizou.\par
-2-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=gloating,How cute! You're showing me so much, sola.\par
-2-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=horny,You're making me so wet, Blad.\par
-2-male_removing_accessory=gloating,OHOHOHOHOHO!!! Removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating alread?\par
-2-male_removed_accessory=happy,What a sensual sight...\par
-2-female_removing_accessory=gloating,Stripping your female_must_masturbate=gloating off?\par
-2-female_removing_accessory=happy,You didn't need it anyway...\par
-2-male_removing_accessory=interested,Well, well, well... Taking your female_must_masturbate=gloating off, ~name~?\par
-2-male_removed_accessory=horny,Good. I want to see you strip.\par
-2-female_removing_accessory=interested,How erotic... You're taking off your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~?\par
-2-female_removing_accessory=horny,Oh, yes... That's what I want to see...\par
-2-male_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
-2-male_removed_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
-2-female_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
-2-female_removing_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
\par
#finished\par
-1-male_removing_accessory=embarrassed,How are you only now just removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating?\par
-1-male_removed_accessory=embarrassed,I refuse to accept this indignity...\par
-1-male_removing_accessory=angry,YOU HAVE NO RIGHT TO REMOVE ONLY THAT WHEN I'M STANDING HERE NAKED!\par
-1-male_removed_accessory=angry,I command you to remove the rest of your clothing!\par
-1-female_removing_accessory=embarrassed,How has it come to this? You're just now taking off your female_must_masturbate=gloating and I'm totally nude.\par
-1-female_removing_accessory=embarrassed,How can I go home after suffering such humiliation...\par
-1-female_removed_accessory=angry,YOU ARE JUST NOW REMOVING YOUR female_must_masturbate=gloating? THIS CANNOT BE ALLOWED!\par
-1-female_removed_accessory=angry,I WILL TAKE MY REVENGE FOR THIS!\par
-1-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=interested,You will join me in nudity soon, Zizou.\par
-1-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=interested,How cute... You're making me wet, Sola. We'll have to get together after this.\par
-1-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=interested,Oh, Blad... You're sooo sexy...\par
-1-female_removing_accessory,target:zizou=angry,THIS IS MY REVENGE! YOU WILL SOON JOIN ME IN HUMILIATION!\par
-1-female_removing_accessory,target:sola=angry,How are you only just now removing THAT, Sola?\par
-1-female_removing_accessory,target:blad=angry,You're just mocking me now, Aren't you, Blad?\par
-1-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=horny,Oh, Zizou... I will see your pussy soon...\par
-1-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=horny,Sola... When you remove so little, you turn me on so much...\par
-1-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=horny,I will trade you all the information I have to get you for one night, Blad.\par
-1-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=angry,I WILL have my revenge, Zizou!\par
-1-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=angry,I will take my revenge on you with a paddle, Sola.\par
-1-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=angry,HOW DARE YOU MOCK ME BY EXPOSING SO LITTLE?\par
-1-female_removed_accessory,target:zizou=happy,How I enjoy seeing you shamed, Zizou.\par
-1-female_removed_accessory,target:sola=gloating,How cute! You're showing me so much, sola.\par
-1-female_removed_accessory,target:blad=horny,You're making me so wet, Blad.\par
-1-male_removing_accessory=gloating,OHOHOHOHOHO!!! Removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating alread?\par
-1-male_removed_accessory=happy,What a sensual sight...\par
-1-female_removing_accessory=gloating,Stripping your female_must_masturbate=gloating off?\par
-1-female_removing_accessory=happy,You didn't need it anyway...\par
-1-male_removing_accessory=interested,Well, well, well... Taking your female_must_masturbate=gloating off, ~name~?\par
-1-male_removed_accessory=horny,Good. I want to see you strip.\par
-1-female_removing_accessory=interested,How erotic... You're taking off your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~?\par
-1-female_removing_accessory=horny,Oh, yes... That's what I want to see...\par
-1-male_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
-1-male_removed_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
-1-female_removing_accessory=interested,You look like you're having fun, ~name~.\par
-1-female_removing_accessory=gloating,I know I am!\par
\par
\par
\par
#OPPONENT REMOVING MINOR CLOTHING\par
#Minor pieces of clothing don't reveal much when removed, but probably indicate more progress than accessory removal.\par
\par
#stage-generic lines that will be used for every individual stage that doesn't have a line written\par
\par
male_removing_minor=calm,A male character is about to remove a clothing item with the type "minor".\par
male_removed_minor=happy,The male character has just removed that minor item.\par
female_removing_minor=calm,A female character is about to remove a clothing item with the type "minor".\par
female_removed_minor=happy,The female character has just removed that minor item.\par
\par
#stage-specific lines that override the stage-generic ones\par
\par
#fully clothed\par
0-male_removing_minor=interested,Go ahead, ~name~. I want to see this.\par
0-male_removed_minor=gloating,Good boy.\par
0-male_removing_minor=happy,I like the looks of this.\par
0-male_removed_minor=interested,You're so good, pet.\par
0-female_removing_minor=calm,Strip. Now.\par
0-female_removing_minor=interested,Oooh... You look so embarrassed, ~name~.\par
0-female_removed_minor=interested,Good little bitch.\par
0-female_removed_minor=happy,It's a good look for you.\par
0-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,What's with the face, Zizou? Embarrassed by having to strip?\par
0-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Strip, little aristocrat.\par
0-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You've got a good body, Blad...\par
0-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO! Little Zizou's going to strip for us?\par
0-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Strip, little magic studet, strip. \par
0-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Oh! How beautiful! Blad is going to undress!\par
0-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=calm,And I mean "Little" Zizou. You have no tits.\par
0-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Good girl. You make a good pet, Sola.\par
0-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,Now let me get ahold of it.\par
0-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Don't be too embarrassed, Zizou. You still have to masturbate for us later.\par
0-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,Good little girl. You'll be touching yourself before you know it...\par
0-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,I will still be victorious in spite of your sex appeal.\par
\par
0-male_removing_minor=interested,What a cutie! ~name~'s got it going on.\par
0-male_removed_minor=gloating,But you still have to jerk off for me.\par
0-male_removing_minor=angry,Me? Staring? I-I Am not! D_Don't be stupid!\par
0-male_removed_minor=shy,S-Stupid, perverted idiot...\par
0-female_removing_minor=happy,Oh, how I love to see you fail, ~name~.\par
0-female_removing_minor=interested,Putting on a show for me?\par
0-female_removed_minor=interested,Don't worry. Your humiliation is my pleasure.\par
0-female_removed_minor=happy,I appreciate your failure.\par
0-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,Not so high and mighty now, are you, Zizou?\par
0-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Don't be so shy, Sola. It's not the first time I've seen you naked.\par
0-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You're really doing it for me, Blad.\par
0-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Look, Zizou! Everyone's looking at you undress!\par
0-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Expose yourself, Sola! Show us all your beautiful body!\par
0-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Strip it off, Blad! We're all watching!\par
0-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=horny,It's nice to see you look so low.\par
0-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Now if only I got to feel you.\par
0-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,How much would it cost to get a "Private Session?"\par
0-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,What a beautiful face of humiliation!\par
0-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,You're becoming quite the showgirl, Sola.\par
0-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,And You don't seem to care!\par
\par
#lost 1 item\par
1-male_removing_minor=interested,Go ahead, ~name~. I want to see this.\par
1-male_removed_minor=gloating,Good boy.\par
1-male_removing_minor=happy,I like the looks of this.\par
1-male_removed_minor=interested,You're so good, pet.\par
1-female_removing_minor=calm,Strip. Now.\par
1-female_removing_minor=interested,Oooh... You look so embarrassed, ~name~.\par
1-female_removed_minor=interested,Good little bitch.\par
1-female_removed_minor=happy,It's a good look for you.\par
1-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,What's with the face, Zizou? Embarrassed by having to strip?\par
1-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Strip, little aristocrat.\par
1-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You've got a good body, Blad...\par
1-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO! Little Zizou's going to strip for us?\par
1-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Strip, little magic studet, strip. \par
1-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Oh! How beautiful! Blad is going to undress!\par
1-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=calm,And I mean "Little" Zizou. You have no tits.\par
1-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Good girl. You make a good pet, Sola.\par
1-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,Now let me get ahold of it.\par
1-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Don't be too embarrassed, Zizou. You still have to masturbate for us later.\par
1-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,Good little girl. You'll be touching yourself before you know it...\par
1-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,I will still be victorious in spite of your sex appeal.\par
\par
1-male_removing_minor=interested,What a cutie! ~name~'s got it going on.\par
1-male_removed_minor=gloating,But you still have to jerk off for me.\par
1-male_removing_minor=angry,Me? Staring? I-I Am not! D_Don't be stupid!\par
1-male_removed_minor=shy,S-Stupid, perverted idiot...\par
1-female_removing_minor=happy,Oh, how I love to see you fail, ~name~.\par
1-female_removing_minor=interested,Putting on a show for me?\par
1-female_removed_minor=interested,Don't worry. Your humiliation is my pleasure.\par
1-female_removed_minor=happy,I appreciate your failure.\par
1-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,Not so high and mighty now, are you, Zizou?\par
1-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Don't be so shy, Sola. It's not the first time I've seen you naked.\par
1-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You're really doing it for me, Blad.\par
1-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Look, Zizou! Everyone's looking at you undress!\par
1-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Expose yourself, Sola! Show us all your beautiful body!\par
1-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Strip it off, Blad! We're all watching!\par
1-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=horny,It's nice to see you look so low.\par
1-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Now if only I got to feel you.\par
1-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,How much would it cost to get a "Private Session?"\par
1-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,What a beautiful face of humiliation!\par
1-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,You're becoming quite the showgirl, Sola.\par
1-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,And You don't seem to care!\par
\par
\par
#lost 2 items\par
2-male_removing_minor=interested,Go ahead, ~name~. I want to see this.\par
2-male_removed_minor=gloating,Good boy.\par
2-male_removing_minor=happy,I like the looks of this.\par
2-male_removed_minor=interested,You're so good, pet.\par
2-female_removing_minor=calm,Strip. Now.\par
2-female_removing_minor=interested,Oooh... You look so embarrassed, ~name~.\par
2-female_removed_minor=interested,Good little bitch.\par
2-female_removed_minor=happy,It's a good look for you.\par
2-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,What's with the face, Zizou? Embarrassed by having to strip?\par
2-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Strip, little aristocrat.\par
2-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You've got a good body, Blad...\par
2-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO! Little Zizou's going to strip for us?\par
2-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Strip, little magic studet, strip. \par
2-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Oh! How beautiful! Blad is going to undress!\par
2-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=calm,And I mean "Little" Zizou. You have no tits.\par
2-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Good girl. You make a good pet, Sola.\par
2-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,Now let me get ahold of it.\par
2-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Don't be too embarrassed, Zizou. You still have to masturbate for us later.\par
2-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,Good little girl. You'll be touching yourself before you know it...\par
2-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,I will still be victorious in spite of your sex appeal.\par
\par
2-male_removing_minor=interested,What a cutie! ~name~'s got it going on.\par
2-male_removed_minor=gloating,But you still have to jerk off for me.\par
2-male_removing_minor=angry,Me? Staring? I-I Am not! D_Don't be stupid!\par
2-male_removed_minor=shy,S-Stupid, perverted idiot...\par
2-female_removing_minor=happy,Oh, how I love to see you fail, ~name~.\par
2-female_removing_minor=interested,Putting on a show for me?\par
2-female_removed_minor=interested,Don't worry. Your humiliation is my pleasure.\par
2-female_removed_minor=happy,I appreciate your failure.\par
2-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,Not so high and mighty now, are you, Zizou?\par
2-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Don't be so shy, Sola. It's not the first time I've seen you naked.\par
2-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You're really doing it for me, Blad.\par
2-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Look, Zizou! Everyone's looking at you undress!\par
2-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Expose yourself, Sola! Show us all your beautiful body!\par
2-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Strip it off, Blad! We're all watching!\par
2-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=horny,It's nice to see you look so low.\par
2-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Now if only I got to feel you.\par
2-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,How much would it cost to get a "Private Session?"\par
2-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,What a beautiful face of humiliation!\par
2-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,You're becoming quite the showgirl, Sola.\par
2-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,And You don't seem to care!\par
\par
#lost 3 items\par
3-male_removing_minor=interested,Go ahead, ~name~. I want to see this.\par
3-male_removed_minor=gloating,Good boy.\par
3-male_removing_minor=happy,I like the looks of this.\par
3-male_removed_minor=interested,You're so good, pet.\par
3-female_removing_minor=calm,Strip. Now.\par
3-female_removing_minor=interested,Oooh... You look so embarrassed, ~name~.\par
3-female_removed_minor=interested,Good little bitch.\par
3-female_removed_minor=happy,It's a good look for you.\par
3-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,What's with the face, Zizou? Embarrassed by having to strip?\par
3-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Strip, little aristocrat.\par
3-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You've got a good body, Blad...\par
3-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO! Little Zizou's going to strip for us?\par
3-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Strip, little magic studet, strip. \par
3-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Oh! How beautiful! Blad is going to undress!\par
3-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=calm,And I mean "Little" Zizou. You have no tits.\par
3-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Good girl. You make a good pet, Sola.\par
3-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,Now let me get ahold of it.\par
3-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Don't be too embarrassed, Zizou. You still have to masturbate for us later.\par
3-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,Good little girl. You'll be touching yourself before you know it...\par
3-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,I will still be victorious in spite of your sex appeal.\par
\par
3-male_removing_minor=interested,What a cutie! ~name~'s got it going on.\par
3-male_removed_minor=gloating,But you still have to jerk off for me.\par
3-male_removing_minor=angry,Me? Staring? I-I Am not! D_Don't be stupid!\par
3-male_removed_minor=shy,S-Stupid, perverted idiot...\par
3-female_removing_minor=happy,Oh, how I love to see you fail, ~name~.\par
3-female_removing_minor=interested,Putting on a show for me?\par
3-female_removed_minor=interested,Don't worry. Your humiliation is my pleasure.\par
3-female_removed_minor=happy,I appreciate your failure.\par
3-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,Not so high and mighty now, are you, Zizou?\par
3-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Don't be so shy, Sola. It's not the first time I've seen you naked.\par
3-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You're really doing it for me, Blad.\par
3-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Look, Zizou! Everyone's looking at you undress!\par
3-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Expose yourself, Sola! Show us all your beautiful body!\par
3-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Strip it off, Blad! We're all watching!\par
3-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=horny,It's nice to see you look so low.\par
3-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Now if only I got to feel you.\par
3-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,How much would it cost to get a "Private Session?"\par
3-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,What a beautiful face of humiliation!\par
3-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,You're becoming quite the showgirl, Sola.\par
3-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,And You don't seem to care!\par
\par
#lost 4 items\par
4-male_removing_minor=interested,Take THAT, ~name~!\par
4-male_removed_minor=gloating,Ooh... You're cute...\par
4-male_removing_minor=happy,Let me see how ypu look without your female_must_masturbate=gloating,  ~name~.\par
4-male_removed_minor=interested,You're quite the cutie, Aren't you? \par
4-female_removing_minor=happy,A beautiful girl like you needs to show me her beautiful body, ~name~.\par
4-female_removing_minor=interested,Thank you for removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
4-female_removed_minor=interested,Strip, ~name~! Your princess commands it!\par
4-female_removed_minor=happy,Good little bitch.4-\par
4-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,Not so high and mighty now, are you, Zizou?\par
4-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Don't be so shy, Sola. It's not the first time I've seen you naked.\par
4-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You're really doing it for me, Blad.\par
4-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Look, Zizou! Everyone's looking at you undress!\par
4-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Expose yourself, Sola! Show us all your beautiful body!\par
4-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Strip it off, Blad! We're all watching!\par
4-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=horny,It's nice to see you look so low.\par
4-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Now if only I got to feel you.\par
4-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,How much would it cost to get a "Private Session?"\par
4-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,What a beautiful face of humiliation!\par
4-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,You're becoming quite the showgirl, Sola.\par
4-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,And You don't seem to care!\par
\par
\par
4-male_removing_minor=interested,What a cutie! ~name~'s got it going on.\par
4-male_removed_minor=gloating,But you still have to jerk off for me.\par
4-male_removing_minor=angry,Me? Staring? I-I Am not! D_Don't be stupid!\par
4-male_removed_minor=shy,S-Stupid, perverted idiot...\par
4-female_removing_minor=happy,Oh, how I love to see you fail, ~name~.\par
4-female_removing_minor=interested,Putting on a show for me?\par
4-female_removed_minor=interested,Don't worry. Your humiliation is my pleasure.\par
4-female_removed_minor=happy,I appreciate your failure.\par
4-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,Not so high and mighty now, are you, Zizou?\par
4-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Don't be so shy, Sola. It's not the first time I've seen you naked.\par
4-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You're really doing it for me, Blad.\par
4-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Look, Zizou! Everyone's looking at you undress!\par
4-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Expose yourself, Sola! Show us all your beautiful body!\par
4-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Strip it off, Blad! We're all watching!\par
4-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=horny,It's nice to see you look so low.\par
4-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Now if only I got to feel you.\par
4-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,How much would it cost to get a "Private Session?"\par
4-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,What a beautiful face of humiliation!\par
4-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,You're becoming quite the showgirl, Sola.\par
4-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,And You don't seem to care!\par
\par
#lost 5 items\par
5-male_removing_minor=interested,Go ahead, ~name~. I want to see this.\par
5-male_removed_minor=gloating,Good boy.\par
5-male_removing_minor=happy,I like the looks of this.\par
5-male_removed_minor=interested,You're so good, pet.\par
5-female_removing_minor=calm,Strip. Now.\par
5-female_removing_minor=interested,Oooh... You look so embarrassed, ~name~.\par
5-female_removed_minor=interested,Good little bitch.\par
5-female_removed_minor=happy,It's a good look for you.\par
5-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,What's with the face, Zizou? Embarrassed by having to strip?\par
5-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Strip, little aristocrat.\par
5-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You've got a good body, Blad...\par
5-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO! Little Zizou's going to strip for us?\par
5-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Strip, little magic studet, strip. \par
5-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Oh! How beautiful! Blad is going to undress!\par
5-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=calm,And I mean "Little" Zizou. You have no tits.\par
5-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Good girl. You make a good pet, Sola.\par
5-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,Now let me get ahold of it.\par
5-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Don't be too embarrassed, Zizou. You still have to masturbate for us later.\par
5-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,Good little girl. You'll be touching yourself before you know it...\par
5-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,I will still be victorious in spite of your sex appeal.\par
\par
5-male_removing_minor=interested,What acutie! ~name~'s got it going on.\par
5-male_removed_minor=gloating,But you still have to jerk off for me.\par
5-male_removing_minor=angry,Me? Staring? I-I Am not! D_Don't be stupid!\par
5-male_removed_minor=shy,S-Stupid, perverted idiot...\par
5-female_removing_minor=happy,Oh, how I love to see you fail, ~name~.\par
5-female_removing_minor=interested,Putting on a show for me?\par
5-female_removed_minor=interested,Don't worry. Your humiliation is my pleasure.\par
5-female_removed_minor=happy,I appreciate your failure.\par
5-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,Not so high and mighty now, are you, Zizou?\par
5-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Don't be so shy, Sola. It's not the first time I've seen you naked.\par
5-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You're really doing it for me, Blad.\par
5-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Look, Zizou! Everyone's looking at you undress!\par
5-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Expose yourself, Sola! Show us all your beautiful body!\par
5-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Strip it off, Blad! We're all watching!\par
5-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=horny,It's nice to see you look so low.\par
5-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Now if only I got to feel you.\par
5-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,How much would it cost to get a "Private Session?"\par
5-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,What a beautiful face of humiliation!\par
5-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,You're becoming quite the showgirl, Sola.\par
5-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,And You don't seem to care!\par
\par
#naked\par
-3-male_removing_minor=interested,Go ahead, ~name~. I want to see this.\par
-3-male_removed_minor=gloating,Good boy.\par
-3-male_removing_minor=happy,I like the looks of this.\par
-3-male_removed_minor=interested,You're so good, pet.\par
-3-female_removing_minor=calm,Strip. Now.\par
-3-female_removing_minor=interested,Oooh... You look so embarrassed, ~name~.\par
-3-female_removed_minor=interested,Good little bitch.\par
-3-female_removed_minor=happy,It's a good look for you.\par
-3-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,What's with the face, Zizou? Embarrassed by having to strip?\par
-3-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Strip, little aristocrat.\par
-3-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You've got a good body, Blad...\par
-3-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO! Little Zizou's going to strip for us?\par
-3-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Strip, little magic studet, strip. \par
-3-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Oh! How beautiful! Blad is going to undress!\par
-3-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=calm,And I mean "Little" Zizou. You have no tits.\par
-3-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Good girl. You make a good pet, Sola.\par
-3-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,Now let me get ahold of it.\par
-3-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Don't be too embarrassed, Zizou. You still have to masturbate for us later.\par
-3-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,Good little girl. You'll be touching yourself before you know it...\par
-3-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,I will still be victorious in spite of your sex appeal.\par
\par
-3-male_removing_minor=interested,What acutie! ~name~'s got it going on.\par
-3-male_removed_minor=gloating,But you still have to jerk off for me.\par
-3-male_removing_minor=angry,Me? Staring? I-I Am not! D_Don't be stupid!\par
-3-male_removed_minor=shy,S-Stupid, perverted idiot...\par
-3-female_removing_minor=happy,Oh, how I love to see you fail, ~name~.\par
-3-female_removing_minor=interested,Putting on a show for me?\par
-3-female_removed_minor=interested,Don't worry. Your humiliation is my pleasure.\par
-3-female_removed_minor=happy,I appreciate your failure.\par
-3-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,Not so high and mighty now, are you, Zizou?\par
-3-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Don't be so shy, Sola. It's not the first time I've seen you naked.\par
-3-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You're really doing it for me, Blad.\par
-3-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Look, Zizou! Everyone's looking at you undress!\par
-3-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Expose yourself, Sola! Show us all your beautiful body!\par
-3-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Strip it off, Blad! We're all watching!\par
-3-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=horny,It's nice to see you look so low.\par
-3-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Now if only I got to feel you.\par
-3-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,How much would it cost to get a "Private Session?"\par
-3-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,What a beautiful face of humiliation!\par
-3-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,You're becoming quite the showgirl, Sola.\par
-3-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,And You don't seem to care!\par
\par
#masturbating\par
-2-male_removing_minor=interested,Take THAT, ~name~!\par
-2-male_removed_minor=gloating,Ooh... You're cute...\par
-2-male_removing_minor=happy,Let me see how ypu look without your female_must_masturbate=gloating,  ~name~.\par
-2-male_removed_minor=interested,You're quite the cutie, Aren't you? \par
-2-female_removing_minor=happy,A beautiful girl like you needs to show me her beautiful body, ~name~.\par
-2-female_removing_minor=interested,Thank you for removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
-2-female_removed_minor=interested,Strip, ~name~! Your princess commands it!\par
-2-female_removed_minor=happy,Good little bitch.4-\par
-2-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,Not so high and mighty now, are you, Zizou?\par
-2-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Don't be so shy, Sola. It's not the first time I've seen you naked.\par
-2-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You're really doing it for me, Blad.\par
-2-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Look, Zizou! Everyone's looking at you undress!\par
-2-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Expose yourself, Sola! Show us all your beautiful body!\par
-2-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Strip it off, Blad! We're all watching!\par
-2-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=horny,It's nice to see you look so low.\par
-2-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Now if only I got to feel you.\par
-2-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,How much would it cost to get a "Private Session?"\par
-2-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,What a beautiful face of humiliation!\par
-2-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,You're becoming quite the showgirl, Sola.\par
-2-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,And You don't seem to care!\par
\par
-2-male_removing_minor=interested,What acutie! ~name~'s got it going on.\par
-2-male_removed_minor=gloating,But you still have to jerk off for me.\par
-2-male_removing_minor=angry,Me? Staring? I-I Am not! D_Don't be stupid!\par
-2-male_removed_minor=shy,S-Stupid, perverted idiot...\par
-2-female_removing_minor=happy,Oh, how I love to see you fail, ~name~.\par
-2-female_removing_minor=interested,Putting on a show for me?\par
-2-female_removed_minor=interested,Don't worry. Your humiliation is my pleasure.\par
-2-female_removed_minor=happy,I appreciate your failure.\par
-2-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,Not so high and mighty now, are you, Zizou?\par
-2-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Don't be so shy, Sola. It's not the first time I've seen you naked.\par
-2-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You're really doing it for me, Blad.\par
-2-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Look, Zizou! Everyone's looking at you undress!\par
-2-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Expose yourself, Sola! Show us all your beautiful body!\par
-2-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Strip it off, Blad! We're all watching!\par
-2-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=horny,It's nice to see you look so low.\par
-2-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Now if only I got to feel you.\par
-2-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,How much would it cost to get a "Private Session?"\par
-2-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,What a beautiful face of humiliation!\par
-2-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,You're becoming quite the showgirl, Sola.\par
-2-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,And You don't seem to care!\par
\par
#finished\par
-1-male_removing_minor=interested,Take THAT, ~name~!\par
-1-male_removed_minor=gloating,Ooh... You're cute...\par
-1-male_removing_minor=happy,Let me see how ypu look without your female_must_masturbate=gloating,  ~name~.\par
-1-male_removed_minor=interested,You're quite the cutie, Aren't you? \par
-1-female_removing_minor=happy,A beautiful girl like you needs to show me her beautiful body, ~name~.\par
-1-female_removing_minor=interested,Thank you for removing your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
-1-female_removed_minor=interested,Strip, ~name~! Your princess commands it!\par
-1-female_removed_minor=happy,Good little bitch.4-\par
-1-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,Not so high and mighty now, are you, Zizou?\par
-1-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Don't be so shy, Sola. It's not the first time I've seen you naked.\par
-1-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You're really doing it for me, Blad.\par
-1-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Look, Zizou! Everyone's looking at you undress!\par
-1-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Expose yourself, Sola! Show us all your beautiful body!\par
-1-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Strip it off, Blad! We're all watching!\par
-1-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=horny,It's nice to see you look so low.\par
-1-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Now if only I got to feel you.\par
-1-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,How much would it cost to get a "Private Session?"\par
-1-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,What a beautiful face of humiliation!\par
-1-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,You're becoming quite the showgirl, Sola.\par
-1-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,And You don't seem to care!\par
\par
-1-male_removing_minor=interested,What acutie! ~name~'s got it going on.\par
-1-male_removed_minor=gloating,But you still have to jerk off for me.\par
-1-male_removing_minor=angry,Me? Staring? I-I Am not! D_Don't be stupid!\par
-1-male_removed_minor=shy,S-Stupid, perverted idiot...\par
-1-female_removing_minor=happy,Oh, how I love to see you fail, ~name~.\par
-1-female_removing_minor=interested,Putting on a show for me?\par
-1-female_removed_minor=interested,Don't worry. Your humiliation is my pleasure.\par
-1-female_removed_minor=happy,I appreciate your failure.\par
-1-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=interested,Not so high and mighty now, are you, Zizou?\par
-1-female_removing_minor,target:sola=interested,Don't be so shy, Sola. It's not the first time I've seen you naked.\par
-1-female_removing_minor,target:blad=interested,You're really doing it for me, Blad.\par
-1-female_removing_minor,target:zizou=gloating,Look, Zizou! Everyone's looking at you undress!\par
-1-female_removing_minor,target:sola=gloating,Expose yourself, Sola! Show us all your beautiful body!\par
-1-female_removing_minor,target:blad=gloating,Strip it off, Blad! We're all watching!\par
-1-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=horny,It's nice to see you look so low.\par
-1-female_removed_minor,target:sola=horny,Now if only I got to feel you.\par
-1-female_removed_minor,target:blad=horny,How much would it cost to get a "Private Session?"\par
-1-female_removed_minor,target:zizou=gloating,What a beautiful face of humiliation!\par
-1-female_removed_minor,target:sola=gloating,You're becoming quite the showgirl, Sola.\par
-1-female_removed_minor,target:blad=gloating,And You don't seem to care!\par
\par
\par
#OPPONENT REMOVING MAJOR CLOTHING\par
#Major clothing reveals a significant amount of skin and likely underwear.\par
#However, as we don't know if the opponent is taking off the top or the bottom, we can't presume that nice abs are showing; maybe she took of her skirt before her shirt.\par
\par
#stage-generic lines that will be used for every individual stage that doesn't have a line written\par
\par
male_removing_major=interested,What the character says before a male loses an item with the "major" type.\par
male_removed_major=interested,What the character says after the major item has been taken off.\par
female_removing_major=interested,What the character says before a female loses an item with the "major" type.\par
female_removed_major=interested,What the character says after the major item has been taken off.\par
\par
#stage-specific lines that override the stage-generic ones\par
\par
#fully clothed\par
0-male_removing_major=angry,I AM NOT ENJOYING THIS, ~name~, YOU PERVERT! \par
0-male_removed_major=shy,W-Well... I'm not NOT enjoying it...\par
0-male_removing_major=interested,Ooohh... Your losing you female_must_masturbate=gloating now?\par
0-male_removed_major=horny,Good. I will like you better when you're naked.\par
0-female_removing_major=happy,Good. Good. I like how cute you look when you lose, ~name~.\par
0-female_removing_major=horny,You're getting closer and closer to licking my pussy, ~name~.\par
0-female_removed_major=interested,Your female_must_masturbate=gloating looks better on the floor anyway.\par
0-female_removed_major=horny,I'll enjoy dominating you.\par
0-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,How I've longed to dominate you, Zizou.\par
0-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,What a cute little bitch you are, Sola.\par
0-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... I can't help but pet my pussy when you strip like this...\par
0-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Strip, Zizou! Show everyone what a little bitch you are!\par
0-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,It's nice to see you so embarrassed, Sola!\par
0-female_removing_major,target:blad=gloating,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad!\par
0-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,When this is over, I'll have you in chains, licking my pussy.\par
0-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,You've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Sola. I have Plans for you later...\par
0-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,I have a strap-on with your name on it, Blad.\par
0-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It's SO wonderful to see you like this, Zizou!\par
0-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,Where are your aristocrat parents now, Sola?\par
0-female_removed_major,target:blad=gloating,And You have to do it for free!\par
\par
\par
0-male_removing_major=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR female_must_masturbate=gloating IN FRONT OF ROYALTY?!\par
0-male_removed_major=shy,N-Not that I mind it too much...\par
0-male_removing_major=interested,Now that you've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~, you're almost ready to cum for me.\par
0-male_removed_major=horny,Soon. Very soon...\par
0-female_removing_major=happy,I will relish your humiliation, ~name~.\par
0-female_removing_major=horny,I will pleasure myself to your shame.\par
0-female_removed_major=interested,Good. You will look better without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
0-female_removed_major=horny,I was right, ~name~.\par
0-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,You will strip now, Zizou... But later..?\par
0-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,Expose yourself to all of us, Sola...\par
0-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... Keep stripping for us please...\par
0-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Oh? How shameful for a goddess to do something so lewd.\par
0-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,You can't buy your way out of this, Sola!\par
0-female_removing_major,target:blad=shocked,How lewd! \par
0-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,Later I will bind you, taste you, pleasure you, and penetrate you...\par
0-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,Now soon you will be on your knees, worshiping my pussy.\par
0-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,Thank you, Blad. I treasure your exhibitions...\par
0-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It will be YOU worshiping ME soon enough!\par
0-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,But maybe I'll let you off easy if you surrender your Syega to me.\par
0-female_removed_major,target:blad=shy,Are you sure you don't do this professionally?\par
\par
\par
#lost 1 item\par
1-male_removing_major=angry,I AM NOT ENJOYING THIS, ~name~, YOU PERVERT! \par
1-male_removed_major=shy,W-Well... I'm not NOT enjoying it...\par
1-male_removing_major=interested,Ooohh... Your losing you female_must_masturbate=gloating now?\par
1-male_removed_major=horny,Good. I will like you better when you're naked.\par
1-female_removing_major=happy,Good. Good. I like how cute you look when you lose, ~name~.\par
1-female_removing_major=horny,You're getting closer and closer to licking my pussy, ~name~.\par
1-female_removed_major=interested,Your female_must_masturbate=gloating looks better on the floor anyway.\par
1-female_removed_major=horny,I'll enjoy dominating you.\par
1-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,How I've longed to dominate you, Zizou.\par
1-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,What a cute little bitch you are, Sola.\par
1-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... I can't help but pet my pussy when you strip like this...\par
1-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Strip, Zizou! Show everyone what a little bitch you are!\par
1-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,It's nice to see you so embarrassed, Sola!\par
1-female_removing_major,target:blad=gloating,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad!\par
1-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,When this is over, I'll have you in chains, licking my pussy.\par
1-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,You've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Sola. I have Plans for you later...\par
1-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,I have a strap-on with your name on it, Blad.\par
1-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It's SO wonderful to see you like this, Zizou!\par
1-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,Where are your aristocrat parents now, Sola?\par
1-female_removed_major,target:blad=gloating,And You have to do it for free!\par
1-male_removing_major=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR female_must_masturbate=gloating IN FRONT OF ROYALTY?!\par
1-male_removed_major=shy,N-Not that I mind it too much...\par
1-male_removing_major=interested,Now that you've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~, you're almost ready to cum for me.\par
1-male_removed_major=horny,Soon. Very soon...\par
1-female_removing_major=happy,I will relish your humiliation, ~name~.\par
1-female_removing_major=horny,I will pleasure myself to your shame.\par
1-female_removed_major=interested,Good. You will look better without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
1-female_removed_major=horny,I was right, ~name~.\par
1-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,You will strip now, Zizou... But later..?\par
1-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,Expose yourself to all of us, Sola...\par
1-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... Keep stripping for us please...\par
1-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Oh? How shameful for a goddess to do something so lewd.\par
1-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,You can't buy your way out of this, Sola!\par
1-female_removing_major,target:blad=shocked,How lewd! \par
1-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,Later I will bind you, taste you, pleasure you, and penetrate you...\par
1-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,Now soon you will be on your knees, worshiping my pussy.\par
1-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,Thank you, Blad. I treasure your exhibitions...\par
1-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It will be YOU worshiping ME soon enough!\par
1-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,But maybe I'll let you off easy if you surrender your Syega to me.\par
1-female_removed_major,target:blad=shy,Are you sure you don't do this professionally?\par
\par
#lost 2 items\par
2-male_removing_major=angry,I AM NOT ENJOYING THIS, ~name~, YOU PERVERT! \par
2-male_removed_major=shy,W-Well... I'm not NOT enjoying it...\par
2-male_removing_major=interested,Ooohh... Your losing you female_must_masturbate=gloating now?\par
2-male_removed_major=horny,Good. I will like you better when you're naked.\par
2-female_removing_major=happy,Good. Good. I like how cute you look when you lose, ~name~.\par
2-female_removing_major=horny,You're getting closer and closer to licking my pussy, ~name~.\par
2-female_removed_major=interested,Your female_must_masturbate=gloating looks better on the floor anyway.\par
2-female_removed_major=horny,I'll enjoy dominating you.\par
2-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,How I've longed to dominate you, Zizou.\par
2-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,What a cute little bitch you are, Sola.\par
2-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... I can't help but pet my pussy when you strip like this...\par
2-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Strip, Zizou! Show everyone what a little bitch you are!\par
2-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,It's nice to see you so embarrassed, Sola!\par
2-female_removing_major,target:blad=gloating,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad!\par
2-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,When this is over, I'll have you in chains, licking my pussy.\par
2-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,You've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Sola. I have Plans for you later...\par
2-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,I have a strap-on with your name on it, Blad.\par
2-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It's SO wonderful to see you like this, Zizou!\par
2-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,Where are your aristocrat parents now, Sola?\par
2-female_removed_major,target:blad=gloating,And You have to do it for free!\par
\par
\par
2-male_removing_major=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR female_must_masturbate=gloating IN FRONT OF ROYALTY?!\par
2-male_removed_major=shy,N-Not that I mind it too much...\par
2-male_removing_major=interested,Now that you've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~, you're almost ready to cum for me.\par
2-male_removed_major=horny,Soon. Very soon...\par
2-female_removing_major=happy,I will relish your humiliation, ~name~.\par
2-female_removing_major=horny,I will pleasure myself to your shame.\par
2-female_removed_major=interested,Good. You will look better without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
2-female_removed_major=horny,I was right, ~name~.\par
2-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,You will strip now, Zizou... But later..?\par
2-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,Expose yourself to all of us, Sola...\par
2-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... Keep stripping for us please...\par
2-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Oh? How shameful for a goddess to do something so lewd.\par
2-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,You can't buy your way out of this, Sola!\par
2-female_removing_major,target:blad=shocked,How lewd! \par
2-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,Later I will bind you, taste you, pleasure you, and penetrate you...\par
2-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,Now soon you will be on your knees, worshiping my pussy.\par
2-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,Thank you, Blad. I treasure your exhibitions...\par
2-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It will be YOU worshiping ME soon enough!\par
2-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,But maybe I'll let you off easy if you surrender your Syega to me.\par
2-female_removed_major,target:blad=shy,Are you sure you don't do this professionally?\par
\par
#lost 3 items\par
3-male_removing_major=angry,I AM NOT ENJOYING THIS, ~name~, YOU PERVERT! \par
3-male_removed_major=shy,W-Well... I'm not NOT enjoying it...\par
3-male_removing_major=interested,Ooohh... Your losing you female_must_masturbate=gloating now?\par
3-male_removed_major=horny,Good. I will like you better when you're naked.\par
3-female_removing_major=happy,Good. Good. I like how cute you look when you lose, ~name~.\par
3-female_removing_major=horny,You're getting closer and closer to licking my pussy, ~name~.\par
3-female_removed_major=interested,Your female_must_masturbate=gloating looks better on the floor anyway.\par
3-female_removed_major=horny,I'll enjoy dominating you.\par
3-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,How I've longed to dominate you, Zizou.\par
3-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,What a cute little bitch you are, Sola.\par
3-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... I can't help but pet my pussy when you strip like this...\par
3-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Strip, Zizou! Show everyone what a little bitch you are!\par
3-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,It's nice to see you so embarrassed, Sola!\par
3-female_removing_major,target:blad=gloating,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad!\par
3-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,When this is over, I'll have you in chains, licking my pussy.\par
3-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,You've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Sola. I have Plans for you later...\par
3-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,I have a strap-on with your name on it, Blad.\par
3-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It's SO wonderful to see you like this, Zizou!\par
3-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,Where are your aristocrat parents now, Sola?\par
3-female_removed_major,target:blad=gloating,And You have to do it for free!\par
\par
\par
3-male_removing_major=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR female_must_masturbate=gloating IN FRONT OF ROYALTY?!\par
3-male_removed_major=shy,N-Not that I mind it too much...\par
3-male_removing_major=interested,Now that you've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~, you're almost ready to cum for me.\par
3-male_removed_major=horny,Soon. Very soon...\par
3-female_removing_major=happy,I will relish your humiliation, ~name~.\par
3-female_removing_major=horny,I will pleasure myself to your shame.\par
3-female_removed_major=interested,Good. You will look better without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
3-female_removed_major=horny,I was right, ~name~.\par
3-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,You will strip now, Zizou... But later..?\par
3-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,Expose yourself to all of us, Sola...\par
3-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... Keep stripping for us please...\par
3-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Oh? How shameful for a goddess to do something so lewd.\par
3-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,You can't buy your way out of this, Sola!\par
3-female_removing_major,target:blad=shocked,How lewd! \par
3-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,Later I will bind you, taste you, pleasure you, and penetrate you...\par
3-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,Now soon you will be on your knees, worshiping my pussy.\par
3-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,Thank you, Blad. I treasure your exhibitions...\par
3-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It will be YOU worshiping ME soon enough!\par
3-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,But maybe I'll let you off easy if you surrender your Syega to me.\par
3-female_removed_major,target:blad=shy,Are you sure you don't do this professionally?\par
\par
#lost 4 items\par
4-male_removing_major=angry,I AM NOT ENJOYING THIS, ~name~, YOU PERVERT! \par
4-male_removed_major=shy,W-Well... I'm not NOT enjoying it...\par
4-male_removing_major=interested,Ooohh... Your losing you female_must_masturbate=gloating now?\par
4-male_removed_major=horny,Good. I will like you better when you're naked.\par
4-female_removing_major=happy,Good. Good. I like how cute you look when you lose, ~name~.\par
4-female_removing_major=horny,You're getting closer and closer to licking my pussy, ~name~.\par
4-female_removed_major=interested,Your female_must_masturbate=gloating looks better on the floor anyway.\par
4-female_removed_major=horny,I'll enjoy dominating you.\par
4-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,How I've longed to dominate you, Zizou.\par
4-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,What a cute little bitch you are, Sola.\par
4-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... I can't help but pet my pussy when you strip like this...\par
4-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Strip, Zizou! Show everyone what a little bitch you are!\par
4-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,It's nice to see you so embarrassed, Sola!\par
4-female_removing_major,target:blad=gloating,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad!\par
4-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,When this is over, I'll have you in chains, licking my pussy.\par
4-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,You've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Sola. I have Plans for you later...\par
4-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,I have a strap-on with your name on it, Blad.\par
4-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It's SO wonderful to see you like this, Zizou!\par
4-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,Where are your aristocrat parents now, Sola?\par
4-female_removed_major,target:blad=gloating,And You have to do it for free!\par
\par
\par
4-male_removing_major=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR female_must_masturbate=gloating IN FRONT OF ROYALTY?!\par
4-male_removed_major=shy,N-Not that I mind it too much...\par
4-male_removing_major=interested,Now that you've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~, you're almost ready to cum for me.\par
4-male_removed_major=horny,Soon. Very soon...\par
4-female_removing_major=happy,I will relish your humiliation, ~name~.\par
4-female_removing_major=horny,I will pleasure myself to your shame.\par
4-female_removed_major=interested,Good. You will look better without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
4-female_removed_major=horny,I was right, ~name~.\par
4-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,You will strip now, Zizou... But later..?\par
4-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,Expose yourself to all of us, Sola...\par
4-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... Keep stripping for us please...\par
4-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Oh? How shameful for a goddess to do something so lewd.\par
4-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,You can't buy your way out of this, Sola!\par
4-female_removing_major,target:blad=shocked,How lewd! \par
4-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,Later I will bind you, taste you, pleasure you, and penetrate you...\par
4-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,Now soon you will be on your knees, worshiping my pussy.\par
4-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,Thank you, Blad. I treasure your exhibitions...\par
4-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It will be YOU worshiping ME soon enough!\par
4-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,But maybe I'll let you off easy if you surrender your Syega to me.\par
4-female_removed_major,target:blad=shy,Are you sure you don't do this professionally?\par
\par
#lost 5 items\par
5-male_removing_major=angry,I AM NOT ENJOYING THIS, ~name~, YOU PERVERT! \par
5-male_removed_major=shy,W-Well... I'm not NOT enjoying it...\par
5-male_removing_major=interested,Ooohh... Your losing you female_must_masturbate=gloating now?\par
5-male_removed_major=horny,Good. I will like you better when you're naked.\par
5-female_removing_major=happy,Good. Good. I like how cute you look when you lose, ~name~.\par
5-female_removing_major=horny,You're getting closer and closer to licking my pussy, ~name~.\par
5-female_removed_major=interested,Your female_must_masturbate=gloating looks better on the floor anyway.\par
5-female_removed_major=horny,I'll enjoy dominating you.\par
5-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,How I've longed to dominate you, Zizou.\par
5-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,What a cute little bitch you are, Sola.\par
5-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... I can't help but pet my pussy when you strip like this...\par
5-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Strip, Zizou! Show everyone what a little bitch you are!\par
5-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,It's nice to see you so embarrassed, Sola!\par
5-female_removing_major,target:blad=gloating,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad!\par
5-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,When this is over, I'll have you in chains, licking my pussy.\par
5-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,You've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Sola. I have Plans for you later...\par
5-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,I have a strap-on with your name on it, Blad.\par
5-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It's SO wonderful to see you like this, Zizou!\par
5-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,Where are your aristocrat parents now, Sola?\par
5-female_removed_major,target:blad=gloating,And You have to do it for free!\par
\par
\par
5-male_removing_major=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR female_must_masturbate=gloating IN FRONT OF ROYALTY?!\par
5-male_removed_major=shy,N-Not that I mind it too much...\par
5-male_removing_major=interested,Now that you've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~, you're almost ready to cum for me.\par
5-male_removed_major=horny,Soon. Very soon...\par
5-female_removing_major=happy,I will relish your humiliation, ~name~.\par
5-female_removing_major=horny,I will pleasure myself to your shame.\par
5-female_removed_major=interested,Good. You will look better without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
5-female_removed_major=horny,I was right, ~name~.\par
5-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,You will strip now, Zizou... But later..?\par
5-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,Expose yourself to all of us, Sola...\par
5-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... Keep stripping for us please...\par
5-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Oh? How shameful for a goddess to do something so lewd.\par
5-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,You can't buy your way out of this, Sola!\par
5-female_removing_major,target:blad=shocked,How lewd! \par
5-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,Later I will bind you, taste you, pleasure you, and penetrate you...\par
5-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,Now soon you will be on your knees, worshiping my pussy.\par
5-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,Thank you, Blad. I treasure your exhibitions...\par
5-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It will be YOU worshiping ME soon enough!\par
5-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,But maybe I'll let you off easy if you surrender your Syega to me.\par
5-female_removed_major,target:blad=shy,Are you sure you don't do this professionally?\par
\par
#nude\par
-3-male_removing_major=angry,I AM NOT ENJOYING THIS, ~name~, YOU PERVERT! \par
-3-male_removed_major=shy,W-Well... I'm not NOT enjoying it...\par
-3-male_removing_major=interested,Ooohh... Your losing you female_must_masturbate=gloating now?\par
-3-male_removed_major=horny,Good. I will like you better when you're naked.\par
-3-female_removing_major=happy,Good. Good. I like how cute you look when you lose, ~name~.\par
-3-female_removing_major=horny,You're getting closer and closer to licking my pussy, ~name~.\par
-3-female_removed_major=interested,Your female_must_masturbate=gloating looks better on the floor anyway.\par
-3-female_removed_major=horny,I'll enjoy dominating you.\par
-3-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,How I've longed to dominate you, Zizou.\par
-3-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,What a cute little bitch you are, Sola.\par
-3-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... I can't help but pet my pussy when you strip like this...\par
-3-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Strip, Zizou! Show everyone what a little bitch you are!\par
-3-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,It's nice to see you so embarrassed, Sola!\par
-3-female_removing_major,target:blad=gloating,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad!\par
-3-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,When this is over, I'll have you in chains, licking my pussy.\par
-3-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,You've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Sola. I have Plans for you later...\par
-3-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,I have a strap-on with your name on it, Blad.\par
-3-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It's SO wonderful to see you like this, Zizou!\par
-3-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,Where are your aristocrat parents now, Sola?\par
-3-female_removed_major,target:blad=gloating,And You have to do it for free!\par
\par
\par
-3-male_removing_major=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR female_must_masturbate=gloating IN FRONT OF ROYALTY?!\par
-3-male_removed_major=shy,N-Not that I mind it too much...\par
-3-male_removing_major=interested,Now that you've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~, you're almost ready to cum for me.\par
-3-male_removed_major=horny,Soon. Very soon...\par
-3-female_removing_major=happy,I will relish your humiliation, ~name~.\par
-3-female_removing_major=horny,I will pleasure myself to your shame.\par
-3-female_removed_major=interested,Good. You will look better without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
-3-female_removed_major=horny,I was right, ~name~.\par
-3-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,You will strip now, Zizou... But later..?\par
-3-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,Expose yourself to all of us, Sola...\par
-3-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... Keep stripping for us please...\par
-3-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Oh? How shameful for a goddess to do something so lewd.\par
-3-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,You can't buy your way out of this, Sola!\par
-3-female_removing_major,target:blad=shocked,How lewd! \par
-3-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,Later I will bind you, taste you, pleasure you, and penetrate you...\par
-3-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,Now soon you will be on your knees, worshiping my pussy.\par
-3-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,Thank you, Blad. I treasure your exhibitions...\par
-3-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It will be YOU worshiping ME soon enough!\par
-3-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,But maybe I'll let you off easy if you surrender your Syega to me.\par
-3-female_removed_major,target:blad=shy,Are you sure you don't do this professionally?\par
\par
#masturbating\par
-2-male_removing_major=angry,I AM NOT ENJOYING THIS, ~name~, YOU PERVERT! \par
-2-male_removed_major=shy,W-Well... I'm not NOT enjoying it...\par
-2-male_removing_major=interested,Ooohh... Your losing you female_must_masturbate=gloating now?\par
-2-male_removed_major=horny,Good. I will like you better when you're naked.\par
-2-female_removing_major=happy,Good. Good. I like how cute you look when you lose, ~name~.\par
-2-female_removing_major=horny,You're getting closer and closer to licking my pussy, ~name~.\par
-2-female_removed_major=interested,Your female_must_masturbate=gloating looks better on the floor anyway.\par
-2-female_removed_major=horny,I'll enjoy dominating you.\par
-2-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,How I've longed to dominate you, Zizou.\par
-2-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,What a cute little bitch you are, Sola.\par
-2-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... I can't help but pet my pussy when you strip like this...\par
-2-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Strip, Zizou! Show everyone what a little bitch you are!\par
-2-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,It's nice to see you so embarrassed, Sola!\par
-2-female_removing_major,target:blad=gloating,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad!\par
-2-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,When this is over, I'll have you in chains, licking my pussy.\par
-2-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,You've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Sola. I have Plans for you later...\par
-2-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,I have a strap-on with your name on it, Blad.\par
-2-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It's SO wonderful to see you like this, Zizou!\par
-2-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,Where are your aristocrat parents now, Sola?\par
-2-female_removed_major,target:blad=gloating,And You have to do it for free!\par
\par
\par
-2-male_removing_major=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR female_must_masturbate=gloating IN FRONT OF ROYALTY?!\par
-2-male_removed_major=shy,N-Not that I mind it too much...\par
-2-male_removing_major=interested,Now that you've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~, you're almost ready to cum for me.\par
-2-male_removed_major=horny,Soon. Very soon...\par
-2-female_removing_major=happy,I will relish your humiliation, ~name~.\par
-2-female_removing_major=horny,I will pleasure myself to your shame.\par
-2-female_removed_major=interested,Good. You will look better without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
-2-female_removed_major=horny,I was right, ~name~.\par
-2-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,You will strip now, Zizou... But later..?\par
-2-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,Expose yourself to all of us, Sola...\par
-2-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... Keep stripping for us please...\par
-2-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Oh? How shameful for a goddess to do something so lewd.\par
-2-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,You can't buy your way out of this, Sola!\par
-2-female_removing_major,target:blad=shocked,How lewd! \par
-2-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,Later I will bind you, taste you, pleasure you, and penetrate you...\par
-2-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,Now soon you will be on your knees, worshiping my pussy.\par
-2-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,Thank you, Blad. I treasure your exhibitions...\par
-2-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It will be YOU worshiping ME soon enough!\par
-2-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,But maybe I'll let you off easy if you surrender your Syega to me.\par
-2-female_removed_major,target:blad=shy,Are you sure you don't do this professionally?\par
\par
#finished\par
-1-male_removing_major=angry,I AM NOT ENJOYING THIS, ~name~, YOU PERVERT! \par
-1-male_removed_major=shy,W-Well... I'm not NOT enjoying it...\par
-1-male_removing_major=interested,Ooohh... Your losing you female_must_masturbate=gloating now?\par
-1-male_removed_major=horny,Good. I will like you better when you're naked.\par
-1-female_removing_major=happy,Good. Good. I like how cute you look when you lose, ~name~.\par
-1-female_removing_major=horny,You're getting closer and closer to licking my pussy, ~name~.\par
-1-female_removed_major=interested,Your female_must_masturbate=gloating looks better on the floor anyway.\par
-1-female_removed_major=horny,I'll enjoy dominating you.\par
-1-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,How I've longed to dominate you, Zizou.\par
-1-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,What a cute little bitch you are, Sola.\par
-1-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... I can't help but pet my pussy when you strip like this...\par
-1-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Strip, Zizou! Show everyone what a little bitch you are!\par
-1-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,It's nice to see you so embarrassed, Sola!\par
-1-female_removing_major,target:blad=gloating,Remove your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Blad!\par
-1-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,When this is over, I'll have you in chains, licking my pussy.\par
-1-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,You've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, Sola. I have Plans for you later...\par
-1-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,I have a strap-on with your name on it, Blad.\par
-1-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It's SO wonderful to see you like this, Zizou!\par
-1-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,Where are your aristocrat parents now, Sola?\par
-1-female_removed_major,target:blad=gloating,And You have to do it for free!\par
\par
\par
-1-male_removing_major=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR female_must_masturbate=gloating IN FRONT OF ROYALTY?!\par
-1-male_removed_major=shy,N-Not that I mind it too much...\par
-1-male_removing_major=interested,Now that you've lost your female_must_masturbate=gloating, ~name~, you're almost ready to cum for me.\par
-1-male_removed_major=horny,Soon. Very soon...\par
-1-female_removing_major=happy,I will relish your humiliation, ~name~.\par
-1-female_removing_major=horny,I will pleasure myself to your shame.\par
-1-female_removed_major=interested,Good. You will look better without your female_must_masturbate=gloating.\par
-1-female_removed_major=horny,I was right, ~name~.\par
-1-female_removing_major,target:zizou=horny,You will strip now, Zizou... But later..?\par
-1-female_removing_major,target:sola=horny,Expose yourself to all of us, Sola...\par
-1-female_removing_major,target:blad=horny,Blad... Keep stripping for us please...\par
-1-female_removing_major,target:zizou=gloating,Oh? How shameful for a goddess to do something so lewd.\par
-1-female_removing_major,target:sola=gloating,You can't buy your way out of this, Sola!\par
-1-female_removing_major,target:blad=shocked,How lewd! \par
-1-female_removed_major,target:zizou=horny,Later I will bind you, taste you, pleasure you, and penetrate you...\par
-1-female_removed_major,target:sola=horny,Now soon you will be on your knees, worshiping my pussy.\par
-1-female_removed_major,target:blad=horny,Thank you, Blad. I treasure your exhibitions...\par
-1-female_removed_major,target:zizou=gloating,It will be YOU worshiping ME soon enough!\par
-1-female_removed_major,target:sola=gloating,But maybe I'll let you off easy if you surrender your Syega to me.\par
-1-female_removed_major,target:blad=shy,Are you sure you don't do this professionally?\par
\par
\par
\par
#OPPONENT REVEALING CHEST OR CROTCH\par
#Characters have different sizes, allowing your character have different responses for each. Males have a small, medium, or large crotch. Females have small, medium, or large breasts.\par
\par
#stage-generic lines that will be used for every individual stage that doesn't have a line written\par
\par
male_chest_will_be_visible=interested,What the character says when a male character is about to remove the last piece of clothing covering their chest. For NPCs, this is a clothing element on the "upper" location, with the "important" type.\par
male_chest_is_visible=interested,What the character says once the male character's chest is visible.\par
male_crotch_will_be_visible=horny,What the character says when a male character is about to remove the last piece of clothing covering their crotch. For NPCs, this is a clothing element on the "lower" location, with the "important" type.\par
male_small_crotch_is_visible=calm,What the character says after the male character's crotch is visible, and has a size value of "small".\par
male_medium_crotch_is_visible=awkward,What the character says after the male character's crotch is visible, and has a size value of "medium".\par
male_large_crotch_is_visible=shocked,What the character says after the male character's crotch is visible, and has a size value of "large".\par
\par
female_chest_will_be_visible=interested,What the character says when a female character is about to remove the last piece of clothing covering their chest. For NPCs, this is a clothing element on the "upper" location, with the "important" type.\par
female_small_chest_is_visible=interested,What the character says after the female character's chest is visible, and has a size value of "small".\par
female_medium_chest_is_visible=horny,What the character says after the female character's chest is visible, and has a size value of "medium".\par
female_large_chest_is_visible=shocked,What the character says after the female character's chest is visible, and has a size value of "large".\par
female_crotch_will_be_visible=horny,What the character says when a female character is about to remove the last piece of clothing covering their crotch. For NPCs, this is a clothing element on the "lower" location, with the "important" type.\par
female_crotch_is_visible=shocked,What the character says after the female character's crotch has become visible.\par
\par
#stage-specific lines that override the stage-generic ones\par
\par
#fully clothed\par
0-male_chest_will_be_visible=interested,This is something I've longed for...\par
0-male_chest_is_visible=horny,You're so toned, ~name~.\par
0-male_crotch_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! YOU'RE GONNA SHOW ME YOUR THING?\par
0-male_small_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's... kind of cute\par
0-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow... It's so sexy...\par
0-male_large_crotch_is_visible=shocked,WHAT THE FUCK?! YOU'D RIP ME IN HALF WITH THAT MONSTER!\par
0-male_chest_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR SHIRT IN FRONT OF ME?!\par
0-male_chest_is_visible=shy,I.../ I don't mind... Shut up...\par
0-male_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I... I can't wait to see this...\par
0-male_small_crotch_is_visible=appreciative,It's so cute! I can't wait to suck it!\par
0-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=happy,That's a nice cock you have, ~name~... Does it play well with princess pussies?\par
0-male_large_crotch_is_visible=horny,That massive cock may be too much for me, but I'll still try to take it up the ass for you, ~name~.\par
0-male_chest_will_be_visible=shy,I'm... Kind of... Inexperienced at this...\par
0-male_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow, ~name~... You're cute...\par
0-male_crotch_will_be_visible=embarrassed,I TALKED A BIG GAME, BUT I'M OUT OF MY DEPTH! I'VE NEVER SEEN A PENIS IN PERSON BEFORE!\par
0-male_small_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so cute... May I touch it, ~name~.\par
0-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so sexy... I want to ride it...\par
0-male_large_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,~name~... May I please try to... Take that thing, um... Anally..?\par
\par
\par
0-female_chest_will_be_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! ~name~ must now take off her top! Wonderful!\par
0-female_small_chest_is_visible=gloating,That't it?! Puberty was not kind to you, was it ~name~? OHOHOHOHO!!!\par
0-female_medium_chest_is_visible=shy,Why do YOUR breasts get to be so big...\par
0-female_large_chest_is_visible=angry,Fuck off! You don't deserve to have tits so big! I do!\par
0-female_crotch_will_be_visible=gloating,Expose your cute, little pussy, ~name~.\par
0-female_crotch_is_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! How delicious to see your womanhood!\par
0-female_chest_will_be_visible=interested,What a beautiful sight! ~name~ must bare her breasts!\par
0-female_small_chest_is_visible=horny,Small breasts are more sensitive. Don't believe me? Let me show you...\par
0-female_medium_chest_is_visible=horny,They look so nice and full... I want to suck on your teats, ~name~.\par
0-female_large_chest_is_visible=horny,SO BIG! I really want some time alone with them, ~name~.\par
0-female_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I've been waiting for this...\par
0-female_crotch_is_visible=horny,~name~... You're so sexy... Please let me taste your cute, little slit...\par
0-female_chest_will_be_visible=happy,About time we see your tits, ~name~.\par
0-female_small_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Thanks for exposing those little gems, ~name~.\par
0-female_medium_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Those beautiful orbs need their nipples flicked. Come over here, ~name~.\par
0-female_large_chest_is_visible=shy,Those are so big... I really want to feel them...\par
0-female_crotch_will_be_visible=calm,Just get on with it!\par
0-female_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's so pretty... I-I mean G-Get on your knees!\par
0-female_chest_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show us your teats...\par
0-female_small_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,W-Why am I so turned on by those little breasts?!\par
0-female_medium_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,They're so cute! I'm getting so wet!\par
0-female_large_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,OH! They're so much better than mine!\par
0-female_crotch_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show it off already!\par
0-female_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Why is your pussy so pretty, ~name~? I want to go deep in there and suckle on your little clit...\par
0-female_chest_will_be_visible=excited,About time!  you've not been topless yet, ~name~, and we've been waiting!\par
0-female_small_chest_is_visible=excited,YES! BARE YOUR CUTER, LITTLE BOOBIES TO THE WORLD!\par
0-female_medium_chest_is_visible=excited,Those are so, so , so cute! you're too sexy, ~name~!\par
0-female_large_chest_is_visible=excited,Thoae are sdo big and beautiful! You should be proud, ~name~!\par
0-female_crotch_will_be_visible=excited,Time to show us your pussy, ~name~!\par
0-female_crotch_is_visible=excited,YES! ~name~'s pussy is soooo cute!\par
\par
0-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! Zizou! Show us your breasts now! I command it!\par
0-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Show us those massive mounds, Sola!\par
0-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose yourself to us, Blad! Those broker boobies are begging to be bared!\par
0-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Joy of joys! The goddess Zizou's itty bitty boobies are now visible to the world!\par
0-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How wonderful! The breasts of an aristocrat's daughter are visible for all of us to see!\par
0-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Exposed breasts are nice, But you put on a show as you bare them, Blad, and that makes it so much better.\par
0-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Time to see the pussy of a goddess, Eh, Zizou?\par
0-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Why so shy, Sola? Afraid to show us all your pussy?\par
0-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose your pussy for us, Blad! I demand it!\par
0-female_crotch_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Wonderful! And as trimmed as I had hoped!\par
0-female_crotch_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How delicious! Your pussy is so cute, Sola, and yet you'reso embarrassed!\par
0-female_crotch_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Thank you for the wonderful show, Blad!\par
\par
\par
\par
#lost 1 item\par
1-male_chest_will_be_visible=interested,This is something I've longed for...\par
1-male_chest_is_visible=horny,You're so toned, ~name~.\par
1-male_crotch_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! YOU'RE GONNA SHOW ME YOUR THING?\par
1-male_small_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's... kind of cute\par
1-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow... It's so sexy...\par
1-male_large_crotch_is_visible=shocked,WHAT THE FUCK?! YOU'D RIP ME IN HALF WITH THAT MONSTER!\par
1-male_chest_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR SHIRT IN FRONT OF ME?!\par
1-male_chest_is_visible=shy,I.../ I don't mind... Shut up...\par
1-male_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I... I can't wait to see this...\par
1-male_small_crotch_is_visible=appreciative,It's so cute! I can't wait to suck it!\par
1-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=happy,That's a nice cock you have, ~name~... Does it play well with princess pussies?\par
1-male_large_crotch_is_visible=horny,That massive cock may be too much for me, but I'll still try to take it up the ass for you, ~name~.\par
1-male_chest_will_be_visible=shy,I'm... Kind of... Inexperienced at this...\par
1-male_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow, ~name~... You're cute...\par
1-male_crotch_will_be_visible=embarrassed,I TALKED A BIG GAME, BUT I'M OUT OF MY DEPTH! I'VE NEVER SEEN A PENIS IN PERSON BEFORE!\par
1-male_small_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so cute... May I touch it, ~name~.\par
1-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so sexy... I want to ride it...\par
1-male_large_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,~name~... May I please try to... Take that thing, um... Anally..?\par
\par
\par
1-female_chest_will_be_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! ~name~ must now take off her top! Wonderful!\par
1-female_small_chest_is_visible=gloating,That't it?! Puberty was not kind to you, was it ~name~? OHOHOHOHO!!!\par
1-female_medium_chest_is_visible=shy,Why do YOUR breasts get to be so big...\par
1-female_large_chest_is_visible=angry,Fuck off! You don't deserve to have tits so big! I do!\par
1-female_crotch_will_be_visible=gloating,Expose your cute, little pussy, ~name~.\par
1-female_crotch_is_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! How delicious to see your womanhood!\par
1-female_chest_will_be_visible=interested,What a beautiful sight! ~name~ must bare her breasts!\par
1-female_small_chest_is_visible=horny,Small breasts are more sensitive. Don't believe me? Let me show you...\par
1-female_medium_chest_is_visible=horny,They look so nice and full... I want to suck on your teats, ~name~.\par
1-female_large_chest_is_visible=horny,SO BIG! I really want some time alone with them, ~name~.\par
1-female_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I've been waiting for this...\par
1-female_crotch_is_visible=horny,~name~... You're so sexy... Please let me taste your cute, little slit...\par
1-female_chest_will_be_visible=happy,About time we see your tits, ~name~.\par
1-female_small_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Thanks for exposing those little gems, ~name~.\par
1-female_medium_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Those beautiful orbs need their nipples flicked. Come over here, ~name~.\par
1-female_large_chest_is_visible=shy,Those are so big... I really want to feel them...\par
1-female_crotch_will_be_visible=calm,Just get on with it!\par
1-female_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's so pretty... I-I mean G-Get on your knees!\par
1-female_chest_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show us your teats...\par
1-female_small_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,W-Why am I so turned on by those little breasts?!\par
1-female_medium_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,They're so cute! I'm getting so wet!\par
1-female_large_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,OH! They're so much better than mine!\par
1-female_crotch_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show it off already!\par
1-female_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Why is your pussy so pretty, ~name~? I want to go deep in there and suckle on your little clit...\par
1-female_chest_will_be_visible=excited,About time!  you've not been topless yet, ~name~, and we've been waiting!\par
1-female_small_chest_is_visible=excited,YES! BARE YOUR CUTER, LITTLE BOOBIES TO THE WORLD!\par
1-female_medium_chest_is_visible=excited,Those are so, so , so cute! you're too sexy, ~name~!\par
1-female_large_chest_is_visible=excited,Thoae are sdo big and beautiful! You should be proud, ~name~!\par
1-female_crotch_will_be_visible=excited,Time to show us your pussy, ~name~!\par
1-female_crotch_is_visible=excited,YES! ~name~'s pussy is soooo cute!\par
\par
1-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! Zizou! Show us your breasts now! I command it!\par
1-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Show us those massive mounds, Sola!\par
1-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose yourself to us, Blad! Those broker boobies are begging to be bared!\par
1-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Joy of joys! The goddess Zizou's itty bitty boobies are now visible to the world!\par
1-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How wonderful! The breasts of an aristocrat's daughter are visible for all of us to see!\par
1-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Exposed breasts are nice, But you put on a show as you bare them, Blad, and that makes it so much better.\par
1-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Time to see the pussy of a goddess, Eh, Zizou?\par
1-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Why so shy, Sola? Afraid to show us all your pussy?\par
1-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose your pussy for us, Blad! I demand it!\par
1-female_crotch_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Wonderful! And as trimmed as I had hoped!\par
1-female_crotch_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How delicious! Your pussy is so cute, Sola, and yet you'reso embarrassed!\par
1-female_crotch_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Thank you for the wonderful show, Blad!\par
\par
#lost 2 items\par
2-male_chest_will_be_visible=interested,This is something I've longed for...\par
2-male_chest_is_visible=horny,You're so toned, ~name~.\par
2-male_crotch_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! YOU'RE GONNA SHOW ME YOUR THING?\par
2-male_small_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's... kind of cute\par
2-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow... It's so sexy...\par
2-male_large_crotch_is_visible=shocked,WHAT THE FUCK?! YOU'D RIP ME IN HALF WITH THAT MONSTER!\par
2-male_chest_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR SHIRT IN FRONT OF ME?!\par
2-male_chest_is_visible=shy,I.../ I don't mind... Shut up...\par
2-male_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I... I can't wait to see this...\par
2-male_small_crotch_is_visible=appreciative,It's so cute! I can't wait to suck it!\par
2-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=happy,That's a nice cock you have, ~name~... Does it play well with princess pussies?\par
2-male_large_crotch_is_visible=horny,That massive cock may be too much for me, but I'll still try to take it up the ass for you, ~name~.\par
2-male_chest_will_be_visible=shy,I'm... Kind of... Inexperienced at this...\par
2-male_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow, ~name~... You're cute...\par
2-male_crotch_will_be_visible=embarrassed,I TALKED A BIG GAME, BUT I'M OUT OF MY DEPTH! I'VE NEVER SEEN A PENIS IN PERSON BEFORE!\par
2-male_small_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so cute... May I touch it, ~name~.\par
2-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so sexy... I want to ride it...\par
2-male_large_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,~name~... May I please try to... Take that thing, um... Anally..?\par
\par
\par
2-female_chest_will_be_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! ~name~ must now take off her top! Wonderful!\par
2-female_small_chest_is_visible=gloating,That't it?! Puberty was not kind to you, was it ~name~? OHOHOHOHO!!!\par
2-female_medium_chest_is_visible=shy,Why do YOUR breasts get to be so big...\par
2-female_large_chest_is_visible=angry,Fuck off! You don't deserve to have tits so big! I do!\par
2-female_crotch_will_be_visible=gloating,Expose your cute, little pussy, ~name~.\par
2-female_crotch_is_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! How delicious to see your womanhood!\par
2-female_chest_will_be_visible=interested,What a beautiful sight! ~name~ must bare her breasts!\par
2-female_small_chest_is_visible=horny,Small breasts are more sensitive. Don't believe me? Let me show you...\par
2-female_medium_chest_is_visible=horny,They look so nice and full... I want to suck on your teats, ~name~.\par
2-female_large_chest_is_visible=horny,SO BIG! I really want some time alone with them, ~name~.\par
2-female_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I've been waiting for this...\par
2-female_crotch_is_visible=horny,~name~... You're so sexy... Please let me taste your cute, little slit...\par
2-female_chest_will_be_visible=happy,About time we see your tits, ~name~.\par
2-female_small_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Thanks for exposing those little gems, ~name~.\par
2-female_medium_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Those beautiful orbs need their nipples flicked. Come over here, ~name~.\par
2-female_large_chest_is_visible=shy,Those are so big... I really want to feel them...\par
2-female_crotch_will_be_visible=calm,Just get on with it!\par
2-female_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's so pretty... I-I mean G-Get on your knees!\par
2-female_chest_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show us your teats...\par
2-female_small_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,W-Why am I so turned on by those little breasts?!\par
2-female_medium_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,They're so cute! I'm getting so wet!\par
2-female_large_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,OH! They're so much better than mine!\par
2-female_crotch_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show it off already!\par
2-female_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Why is your pussy so pretty, ~name~? I want to go deep in there and suckle on your little clit...\par
2-female_chest_will_be_visible=excited,About time!  you've not been topless yet, ~name~, and we've been waiting!\par
2-female_small_chest_is_visible=excited,YES! BARE YOUR CUTER, LITTLE BOOBIES TO THE WORLD!\par
2-female_medium_chest_is_visible=excited,Those are so, so , so cute! you're too sexy, ~name~!\par
2-female_large_chest_is_visible=excited,Thoae are sdo big and beautiful! You should be proud, ~name~!\par
2-female_crotch_will_be_visible=excited,Time to show us your pussy, ~name~!\par
2-female_crotch_is_visible=excited,YES! ~name~'s pussy is soooo cute!\par
\par
2-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! Zizou! Show us your breasts now! I command it!\par
2-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Show us those massive mounds, Sola!\par
2-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose yourself to us, Blad! Those broker boobies are begging to be bared!\par
2-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Joy of joys! The goddess Zizou's itty bitty boobies are now visible to the world!\par
2-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How wonderful! The breasts of an aristocrat's daughter are visible for all of us to see!\par
2-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Exposed breasts are nice, But you put on a show as you bare them, Blad, and that makes it so much better.\par
2-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Time to see the pussy of a goddess, Eh, Zizou?\par
2-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Why so shy, Sola? Afraid to show us all your pussy?\par
2-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose your pussy for us, Blad! I demand it!\par
2-female_crotch_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Wonderful! And as trimmed as I had hoped!\par
2-female_crotch_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How delicious! Your pussy is so cute, Sola, and yet you'reso embarrassed!\par
2-female_crotch_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Thank you for the wonderful show, Blad!\par
\par
#lost 3 items\par
3-male_chest_will_be_visible=interested,This is something I've longed for...\par
3-male_chest_is_visible=horny,You're so toned, ~name~.\par
3-male_crotch_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! YOU'RE GONNA SHOW ME YOUR THING?\par
3-male_small_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's... kind of cute\par
3-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow... It's so sexy...\par
3-male_large_crotch_is_visible=shocked,WHAT THE FUCK?! YOU'D RIP ME IN HALF WITH THAT MONSTER!\par
3-male_chest_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR SHIRT IN FRONT OF ME?!\par
3-male_chest_is_visible=shy,I.../ I don't mind... Shut up...\par
3-male_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I... I can't wait to see this...\par
3-male_small_crotch_is_visible=appreciative,It's so cute! I can't wait to suck it!\par
3-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=happy,That's a nice cock you have, ~name~... Does it play well with princess pussies?\par
3-male_large_crotch_is_visible=horny,That massive cock may be too much for me, but I'll still try to take it up the ass for you, ~name~.\par
3-male_chest_will_be_visible=shy,I'm... Kind of... Inexperienced at this...\par
3-male_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow, ~name~... You're cute...\par
3-male_crotch_will_be_visible=embarrassed,I TALKED A BIG GAME, BUT I'M OUT OF MY DEPTH! I'VE NEVER SEEN A PENIS IN PERSON BEFORE!\par
3-male_small_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so cute... May I touch it, ~name~.\par
3-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so sexy... I want to ride it...\par
3-male_large_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,~name~... May I please try to... Take that thing, um... Anally..?\par
\par
\par
3-female_chest_will_be_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! ~name~ must now take off her top! Wonderful!\par
3-female_small_chest_is_visible=gloating,That't it?! Puberty was not kind to you, was it ~name~? OHOHOHOHO!!!\par
3-female_medium_chest_is_visible=shy,Why do YOUR breasts get to be so big...\par
3-female_large_chest_is_visible=angry,Fuck off! You don't deserve to have tits so big! I do!\par
3-female_crotch_will_be_visible=gloating,Expose your cute, little pussy, ~name~.\par
3-female_crotch_is_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! How delicious to see your womanhood!\par
3-female_chest_will_be_visible=interested,What a beautiful sight! ~name~ must bare her breasts!\par
3-female_small_chest_is_visible=horny,Small breasts are more sensitive. Don't believe me? Let me show you...\par
3-female_medium_chest_is_visible=horny,They look so nice and full... I want to suck on your teats, ~name~.\par
3-female_large_chest_is_visible=horny,SO BIG! I really want some time alone with them, ~name~.\par
3-female_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I've been waiting for this...\par
3-female_crotch_is_visible=horny,~name~... You're so sexy... Please let me taste your cute, little slit...\par
3-female_chest_will_be_visible=happy,About time we see your tits, ~name~.\par
3-female_small_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Thanks for exposing those little gems, ~name~.\par
3-female_medium_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Those beautiful orbs need their nipples flicked. Come over here, ~name~.\par
3-female_large_chest_is_visible=shy,Those are so big... I really want to feel them...\par
3-female_crotch_will_be_visible=calm,Just get on with it!\par
3-female_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's so pretty... I-I mean G-Get on your knees!\par
3-female_chest_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show us your teats...\par
3-female_small_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,W-Why am I so turned on by those little breasts?!\par
3-female_medium_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,They're so cute! I'm getting so wet!\par
3-female_large_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,OH! They're so much better than mine!\par
3-female_crotch_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show it off already!\par
3-female_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Why is your pussy so pretty, ~name~? I want to go deep in there and suckle on your little clit...\par
3-female_chest_will_be_visible=excited,About time!  you've not been topless yet, ~name~, and we've been waiting!\par
3-female_small_chest_is_visible=excited,YES! BARE YOUR CUTER, LITTLE BOOBIES TO THE WORLD!\par
3-female_medium_chest_is_visible=excited,Those are so, so , so cute! you're too sexy, ~name~!\par
3-female_large_chest_is_visible=excited,Thoae are sdo big and beautiful! You should be proud, ~name~!\par
3-female_crotch_will_be_visible=excited,Time to show us your pussy, ~name~!\par
3-female_crotch_is_visible=excited,YES! ~name~'s pussy is soooo cute!\par
\par
3-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! Zizou! Show us your breasts now! I command it!\par
3-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Show us those massive mounds, Sola!\par
3-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose yourself to us, Blad! Those broker boobies are begging to be bared!\par
3-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Joy of joys! The goddess Zizou's itty bitty boobies are now visible to the world!\par
3-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How wonderful! The breasts of an aristocrat's daughter are visible for all of us to see!\par
3-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Exposed breasts are nice, But you put on a show as you bare them, Blad, and that makes it so much better.\par
3-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Time to see the pussy of a goddess, Eh, Zizou?\par
3-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Why so shy, Sola? Afraid to show us all your pussy?\par
3-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose your pussy for us, Blad! I demand it!\par
3-female_crotch_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Wonderful! And as trimmed as I had hoped!\par
3-female_crotch_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How delicious! Your pussy is so cute, Sola, and yet you'reso embarrassed!\par
3-female_crotch_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Thank you for the wonderful show, Blad!\par
\par
#lost 4 items\par
4-male_chest_will_be_visible=interested,This is something I've longed for...\par
4-male_chest_is_visible=horny,You're so toned, ~name~.\par
4-male_crotch_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! YOU'RE GONNA SHOW ME YOUR THING?\par
4-male_small_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's... kind of cute\par
4-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow... It's so sexy...\par
4-male_large_crotch_is_visible=shocked,WHAT THE FUCK?! YOU'D RIP ME IN HALF WITH THAT MONSTER!\par
4-male_chest_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR SHIRT IN FRONT OF ME?!\par
4-male_chest_is_visible=shy,I.../ I don't mind... Shut up...\par
4-male_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I... I can't wait to see this...\par
4-male_small_crotch_is_visible=appreciative,It's so cute! I can't wait to suck it!\par
4-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=happy,That's a nice cock you have, ~name~... Does it play well with princess pussies?\par
4-male_large_crotch_is_visible=horny,That massive cock may be too much for me, but I'll still try to take it up the ass for you, ~name~.\par
4-male_chest_will_be_visible=shy,I'm... Kind of... Inexperienced at this...\par
4-male_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow, ~name~... You're cute...\par
4-male_crotch_will_be_visible=embarrassed,I TALKED A BIG GAME, BUT I'M OUT OF MY DEPTH! I'VE NEVER SEEN A PENIS IN PERSON BEFORE!\par
4-male_small_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so cute... May I touch it, ~name~.\par
4-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so sexy... I want to ride it...\par
4-male_large_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,~name~... May I please try to... Take that thing, um... Anally..?\par
\par
\par
4-female_chest_will_be_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! ~name~ must now take off her top! Wonderful!\par
4-female_small_chest_is_visible=gloating,That't it?! Puberty was not kind to you, was it ~name~? OHOHOHOHO!!!\par
4-female_medium_chest_is_visible=shy,Why do YOUR breasts get to be so big...\par
4-female_large_chest_is_visible=angry,Fuck off! You don't deserve to have tits so big! I do!\par
4-female_crotch_will_be_visible=gloating,Expose your cute, little pussy, ~name~.\par
4-female_crotch_is_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! How delicious to see your womanhood!\par
4-female_chest_will_be_visible=interested,What a beautiful sight! ~name~ must bare her breasts!\par
4-female_small_chest_is_visible=horny,Small breasts are more sensitive. Don't believe me? Let me show you...\par
4-female_medium_chest_is_visible=horny,They look so nice and full... I want to suck on your teats, ~name~.\par
4-female_large_chest_is_visible=horny,SO BIG! I really want some time alone with them, ~name~.\par
4-female_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I've been waiting for this...\par
4-female_crotch_is_visible=horny,~name~... You're so sexy... Please let me taste your cute, little slit...\par
4-female_chest_will_be_visible=happy,About time we see your tits, ~name~.\par
4-female_small_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Thanks for exposing those little gems, ~name~.\par
4-female_medium_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Those beautiful orbs need their nipples flicked. Come over here, ~name~.\par
4-female_large_chest_is_visible=shy,Those are so big... I really want to feel them...\par
4-female_crotch_will_be_visible=calm,Just get on with it!\par
4-female_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's so pretty... I-I mean G-Get on your knees!\par
4-female_chest_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show us your teats...\par
4-female_small_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,W-Why am I so turned on by those little breasts?!\par
4-female_medium_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,They're so cute! I'm getting so wet!\par
4-female_large_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,OH! They're so much better than mine!\par
4-female_crotch_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show it off already!\par
4-female_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Why is your pussy so pretty, ~name~? I want to go deep in there and suckle on your little clit...\par
4-female_chest_will_be_visible=excited,About time!  you've not been topless yet, ~name~, and we've been waiting!\par
4-female_small_chest_is_visible=excited,YES! BARE YOUR CUTER, LITTLE BOOBIES TO THE WORLD!\par
4-female_medium_chest_is_visible=excited,Those are so, so , so cute! you're too sexy, ~name~!\par
4-female_large_chest_is_visible=excited,Thoae are sdo big and beautiful! You should be proud, ~name~!\par
4-female_crotch_will_be_visible=excited,Time to show us your pussy, ~name~!\par
4-female_crotch_is_visible=excited,YES! ~name~'s pussy is soooo cute!\par
\par
4-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! Zizou! Show us your breasts now! I command it!\par
4-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Show us those massive mounds, Sola!\par
4-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose yourself to us, Blad! Those broker boobies are begging to be bared!\par
4-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Joy of joys! The goddess Zizou's itty bitty boobies are now visible to the world!\par
4-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How wonderful! The breasts of an aristocrat's daughter are visible for all of us to see!\par
4-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Exposed breasts are nice, But you put on a show as you bare them, Blad, and that makes it so much better.\par
4-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Time to see the pussy of a goddess, Eh, Zizou?\par
4-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Why so shy, Sola? Afraid to show us all your pussy?\par
4-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose your pussy for us, Blad! I demand it!\par
4-female_crotch_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Wonderful! And as trimmed as I had hoped!\par
4-female_crotch_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How delicious! Your pussy is so cute, Sola, and yet you'reso embarrassed!\par
4-female_crotch_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Thank you for the wonderful show, Blad!\par
\par
#lost 5 items\par
5-male_chest_will_be_visible=interested,This is something I've longed for...\par
5-male_chest_is_visible=horny,You're so toned, ~name~.\par
5-male_crotch_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! YOU'RE GONNA SHOW ME YOUR THING?\par
5-male_small_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's... kind of cute\par
5-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow... It's so sexy...\par
5-male_large_crotch_is_visible=shocked,WHAT THE FUCK?! YOU'D RIP ME IN HALF WITH THAT MONSTER!\par
5-male_chest_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR SHIRT IN FRONT OF ME?!\par
5-male_chest_is_visible=shy,I.../ I don't mind... Shut up...\par
5-male_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I... I can't wait to see this...\par
5-male_small_crotch_is_visible=appreciative,It's so cute! I can't wait to suck it!\par
5-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=happy,That's a nice cock you have, ~name~... Does it play well with princess pussies?\par
5-male_large_crotch_is_visible=horny,That massive cock may be too much for me, but I'll still try to take it up the ass for you, ~name~.\par
5-male_chest_will_be_visible=shy,I'm... Kind of... Inexperienced at this...\par
5-male_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow, ~name~... You're cute...\par
5-male_crotch_will_be_visible=embarrassed,I TALKED A BIG GAME, BUT I'M OUT OF MY DEPTH! I'VE NEVER SEEN A PENIS IN PERSON BEFORE!\par
5-male_small_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so cute... May I touch it, ~name~.\par
5-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so sexy... I want to ride it...\par
5-male_large_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,~name~... May I please try to... Take that thing, um... Anally..?\par
\par
\par
5-female_chest_will_be_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! ~name~ must now take off her top! Wonderful!\par
5-female_small_chest_is_visible=gloating,That't it?! Puberty was not kind to you, was it ~name~? OHOHOHOHO!!!\par
5-female_medium_chest_is_visible=shy,Why do YOUR breasts get to be so big...\par
5-female_large_chest_is_visible=angry,Fuck off! You don't deserve to have tits so big! I do!\par
5-female_crotch_will_be_visible=gloating,Expose your cute, little pussy, ~name~.\par
5-female_crotch_is_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! How delicious to see your womanhood!\par
5-female_chest_will_be_visible=interested,What a beautiful sight! ~name~ must bare her breasts!\par
5-female_small_chest_is_visible=horny,Small breasts are more sensitive. Don't believe me? Let me show you...\par
5-female_medium_chest_is_visible=horny,They look so nice and full... I want to suck on your teats, ~name~.\par
5-female_large_chest_is_visible=horny,SO BIG! I really want some time alone with them, ~name~.\par
5-female_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I've been waiting for this...\par
5-female_crotch_is_visible=horny,~name~... You're so sexy... Please let me taste your cute, little slit...\par
5-female_chest_will_be_visible=happy,About time we see your tits, ~name~.\par
5-female_small_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Thanks for exposing those little gems, ~name~.\par
5-female_medium_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Those beautiful orbs need their nipples flicked. Come over here, ~name~.\par
5-female_large_chest_is_visible=shy,Those are so big... I really want to feel them...\par
5-female_crotch_will_be_visible=calm,Just get on with it!\par
5-female_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's so pretty... I-I mean G-Get on your knees!\par
5-female_chest_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show us your teats...\par
5-female_small_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,W-Why am I so turned on by those little breasts?!\par
5-female_medium_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,They're so cute! I'm getting so wet!\par
5-female_large_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,OH! They're so much better than mine!\par
5-female_crotch_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show it off already!\par
5-female_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Why is your pussy so pretty, ~name~? I want to go deep in there and suckle on your little clit...\par
5-female_chest_will_be_visible=excited,About time!  you've not been topless yet, ~name~, and we've been waiting!\par
5-female_small_chest_is_visible=excited,YES! BARE YOUR CUTER, LITTLE BOOBIES TO THE WORLD!\par
5-female_medium_chest_is_visible=excited,Those are so, so , so cute! you're too sexy, ~name~!\par
5-female_large_chest_is_visible=excited,Thoae are sdo big and beautiful! You should be proud, ~name~!\par
5-female_crotch_will_be_visible=excited,Time to show us your pussy, ~name~!\par
5-female_crotch_is_visible=excited,YES! ~name~'s pussy is soooo cute!\par
\par
5-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! Zizou! Show us your breasts now! I command it!\par
5-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Show us those massive mounds, Sola!\par
5-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose yourself to us, Blad! Those broker boobies are begging to be bared!\par
5-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Joy of joys! The goddess Zizou's itty bitty boobies are now visible to the world!\par
5-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How wonderful! The breasts of an aristocrat's daughter are visible for all of us to see!\par
5-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Exposed breasts are nice, But you put on a show as you bare them, Blad, and that makes it so much better.\par
5-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Time to see the pussy of a goddess, Eh, Zizou?\par
5-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Why so shy, Sola? Afraid to show us all your pussy?\par
5-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose your pussy for us, Blad! I demand it!\par
5-female_crotch_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Wonderful! And as trimmed as I had hoped!\par
5-female_crotch_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How delicious! Your pussy is so cute, Sola, and yet you'reso embarrassed!\par
5-female_crotch_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Thank you for the wonderful show, Blad!\par
\par
\par
#nude\par
-3-male_chest_will_be_visible=interested,This is something I've longed for...\par
-3-male_chest_is_visible=horny,You're so toned, ~name~.\par
-3-male_crotch_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! YOU'RE GONNA SHOW ME YOUR THING?\par
-3-male_small_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's... kind of cute\par
-3-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow... It's so sexy...\par
-3-male_large_crotch_is_visible=shocked,WHAT THE FUCK?! YOU'D RIP ME IN HALF WITH THAT MONSTER!\par
-3-male_chest_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR SHIRT IN FRONT OF ME?!\par
-3-male_chest_is_visible=shy,I.../ I don't mind... Shut up...\par
-3-male_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I... I can't wait to see this...\par
-3-male_small_crotch_is_visible=appreciative,It's so cute! I can't wait to suck it!\par
-3-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=happy,That's a nice cock you have, ~name~... Does it play well with princess pussies?\par
-3-male_large_crotch_is_visible=horny,That massive cock may be too much for me, but I'll still try to take it up the ass for you, ~name~.\par
-3-male_chest_will_be_visible=shy,I'm... Kind of... Inexperienced at this...\par
-3-male_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow, ~name~... You're cute...\par
-3-male_crotch_will_be_visible=embarrassed,I TALKED A BIG GAME, BUT I'M OUT OF MY DEPTH! I'VE NEVER SEEN A PENIS IN PERSON BEFORE!\par
-3-male_small_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so cute... May I touch it, ~name~.\par
-3-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so sexy... I want to ride it...\par
-3-male_large_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,~name~... May I please try to... Take that thing, um... Anally..?\par
\par
\par
-3-female_chest_will_be_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! ~name~ must now take off her top! Wonderful!\par
-3-female_small_chest_is_visible=gloating,That't it?! Puberty was not kind to you, was it ~name~? OHOHOHOHO!!!\par
-3-female_medium_chest_is_visible=shy,Why do YOUR breasts get to be so big...\par
-3-female_large_chest_is_visible=angry,Fuck off! You don't deserve to have tits so big! I do!\par
-3-female_crotch_will_be_visible=gloating,Expose your cute, little pussy, ~name~.\par
-3-female_crotch_is_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! How delicious to see your womanhood!\par
-3-female_chest_will_be_visible=interested,What a beautiful sight! ~name~ must bare her breasts!\par
-3-female_small_chest_is_visible=horny,Small breasts are more sensitive. Don't believe me? Let me show you...\par
-3-female_medium_chest_is_visible=horny,They look so nice and full... I want to suck on your teats, ~name~.\par
-3-female_large_chest_is_visible=horny,SO BIG! I really want some time alone with them, ~name~.\par
-3-female_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I've been waiting for this...\par
-3-female_crotch_is_visible=horny,~name~... You're so sexy... Please let me taste your cute, little slit...\par
-3-female_chest_will_be_visible=happy,About time we see your tits, ~name~.\par
-3-female_small_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Thanks for exposing those little gems, ~name~.\par
-3-female_medium_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Those beautiful orbs need their nipples flicked. Come over here, ~name~.\par
-3-female_large_chest_is_visible=shy,Those are so big... I really want to feel them...\par
-3-female_crotch_will_be_visible=calm,Just get on with it!\par
-3-female_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's so pretty... I-I mean G-Get on your knees!\par
-3-female_chest_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show us your teats...\par
-3-female_small_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,W-Why am I so turned on by those little breasts?!\par
-3-female_medium_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,They're so cute! I'm getting so wet!\par
-3-female_large_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,OH! They're so much better than mine!\par
-3-female_crotch_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show it off already!\par
-3-female_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Why is your pussy so pretty, ~name~? I want to go deep in there and suckle on your little clit...\par
-3-female_chest_will_be_visible=excited,About time!  you've not been topless yet, ~name~, and we've been waiting!\par
-3-female_small_chest_is_visible=excited,YES! BARE YOUR CUTER, LITTLE BOOBIES TO THE WORLD!\par
-3-female_medium_chest_is_visible=excited,Those are so, so , so cute! you're too sexy, ~name~!\par
-3-female_large_chest_is_visible=excited,Thoae are sdo big and beautiful! You should be proud, ~name~!\par
-3-female_crotch_will_be_visible=excited,Time to show us your pussy, ~name~!\par
-3-female_crotch_is_visible=excited,YES! ~name~'s pussy is soooo cute!\par
\par
-3-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! Zizou! Show us your breasts now! I command it!\par
-3-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Show us those massive mounds, Sola!\par
-3-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose yourself to us, Blad! Those broker boobies are begging to be bared!\par
-3-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Joy of joys! The goddess Zizou's itty bitty boobies are now visible to the world!\par
-3-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How wonderful! The breasts of an aristocrat's daughter are visible for all of us to see!\par
-3-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Exposed breasts are nice, But you put on a show as you bare them, Blad, and that makes it so much better.\par
-3-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Time to see the pussy of a goddess, Eh, Zizou?\par
-3-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Why so shy, Sola? Afraid to show us all your pussy?\par
-3-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose your pussy for us, Blad! I demand it!\par
-3-female_crotch_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Wonderful! And as trimmed as I had hoped!\par
-3-female_crotch_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How delicious! Your pussy is so cute, Sola, and yet you'reso embarrassed!\par
-3-female_crotch_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Thank you for the wonderful show, Blad!\par
\par
#masturbating\par
-2-male_chest_will_be_visible=interested,This is something I've longed for...\par
-2-male_chest_is_visible=horny,You're so toned, ~name~.\par
-2-male_crotch_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! YOU'RE GONNA SHOW ME YOUR THING?\par
-2-male_small_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's... kind of cute\par
-2-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow... It's so sexy...\par
-2-male_large_crotch_is_visible=shocked,WHAT THE FUCK?! YOU'D RIP ME IN HALF WITH THAT MONSTER!\par
-2-male_chest_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR SHIRT IN FRONT OF ME?!\par
-2-male_chest_is_visible=shy,I.../ I don't mind... Shut up...\par
-2-male_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I... I can't wait to see this...\par
-2-male_small_crotch_is_visible=appreciative,It's so cute! I can't wait to suck it!\par
-2-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=happy,That's a nice cock you have, ~name~... Does it play well with princess pussies?\par
-2-male_large_crotch_is_visible=horny,That massive cock may be too much for me, but I'll still try to take it up the ass for you, ~name~.\par
-2-male_chest_will_be_visible=shy,I'm... Kind of... Inexperienced at this...\par
-2-male_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow, ~name~... You're cute...\par
-2-male_crotch_will_be_visible=embarrassed,I TALKED A BIG GAME, BUT I'M OUT OF MY DEPTH! I'VE NEVER SEEN A PENIS IN PERSON BEFORE!\par
-2-male_small_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so cute... May I touch it, ~name~.\par
-2-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so sexy... I want to ride it...\par
-2-male_large_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,~name~... May I please try to... Take that thing, um... Anally..?\par
\par
\par
-2-female_chest_will_be_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! ~name~ must now take off her top! Wonderful!\par
-2-female_small_chest_is_visible=gloating,That't it?! Puberty was not kind to you, was it ~name~? OHOHOHOHO!!!\par
-2-female_medium_chest_is_visible=shy,Why do YOUR breasts get to be so big...\par
-2-female_large_chest_is_visible=angry,Fuck off! You don't deserve to have tits so big! I do!\par
-2-female_crotch_will_be_visible=gloating,Expose your cute, little pussy, ~name~.\par
-2-female_crotch_is_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! How delicious to see your womanhood!\par
-2-female_chest_will_be_visible=interested,What a beautiful sight! ~name~ must bare her breasts!\par
-2-female_small_chest_is_visible=horny,Small breasts are more sensitive. Don't believe me? Let me show you...\par
-2-female_medium_chest_is_visible=horny,They look so nice and full... I want to suck on your teats, ~name~.\par
-2-female_large_chest_is_visible=horny,SO BIG! I really want some time alone with them, ~name~.\par
-2-female_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I've been waiting for this...\par
-2-female_crotch_is_visible=horny,~name~... You're so sexy... Please let me taste your cute, little slit...\par
-2-female_chest_will_be_visible=happy,About time we see your tits, ~name~.\par
-2-female_small_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Thanks for exposing those little gems, ~name~.\par
-2-female_medium_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Those beautiful orbs need their nipples flicked. Come over here, ~name~.\par
-2-female_large_chest_is_visible=shy,Those are so big... I really want to feel them...\par
-2-female_crotch_will_be_visible=calm,Just get on with it!\par
-2-female_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's so pretty... I-I mean G-Get on your knees!\par
-2-female_chest_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show us your teats...\par
-2-female_small_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,W-Why am I so turned on by those little breasts?!\par
-2-female_medium_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,They're so cute! I'm getting so wet!\par
-2-female_large_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,OH! They're so much better than mine!\par
-2-female_crotch_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show it off already!\par
-2-female_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Why is your pussy so pretty, ~name~? I want to go deep in there and suckle on your little clit...\par
-2-female_chest_will_be_visible=excited,About time!  you've not been topless yet, ~name~, and we've been waiting!\par
-2-female_small_chest_is_visible=excited,YES! BARE YOUR CUTER, LITTLE BOOBIES TO THE WORLD!\par
-2-female_medium_chest_is_visible=excited,Those are so, so , so cute! you're too sexy, ~name~!\par
-2-female_large_chest_is_visible=excited,Thoae are sdo big and beautiful! You should be proud, ~name~!\par
-2-female_crotch_will_be_visible=excited,Time to show us your pussy, ~name~!\par
-2-female_crotch_is_visible=excited,YES! ~name~'s pussy is soooo cute!\par
\par
-2-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! Zizou! Show us your breasts now! I command it!\par
-2-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Show us those massive mounds, Sola!\par
-2-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose yourself to us, Blad! Those broker boobies are begging to be bared!\par
-2-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Joy of joys! The goddess Zizou's itty bitty boobies are now visible to the world!\par
-2-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How wonderful! The breasts of an aristocrat's daughter are visible for all of us to see!\par
-2-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Exposed breasts are nice, But you put on a show as you bare them, Blad, and that makes it so much better.\par
-2-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Time to see the pussy of a goddess, Eh, Zizou?\par
-2-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Why so shy, Sola? Afraid to show us all your pussy?\par
-2-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose your pussy for us, Blad! I demand it!\par
-2-female_crotch_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Wonderful! And as trimmed as I had hoped!\par
-2-female_crotch_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How delicious! Your pussy is so cute, Sola, and yet you'reso embarrassed!\par
-2-female_crotch_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Thank you for the wonderful show, Blad!\par
\par
#finished\par
-1-male_chest_will_be_visible=interested,This is something I've longed for...\par
-1-male_chest_is_visible=horny,You're so toned, ~name~.\par
-1-male_crotch_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! YOU'RE GONNA SHOW ME YOUR THING?\par
-1-male_small_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's... kind of cute\par
-1-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow... It's so sexy...\par
-1-male_large_crotch_is_visible=shocked,WHAT THE FUCK?! YOU'D RIP ME IN HALF WITH THAT MONSTER!\par
-1-male_chest_will_be_visible=angry,YOU PERVERT! HOW DARE YOU REMOVE YOUR SHIRT IN FRONT OF ME?!\par
-1-male_chest_is_visible=shy,I.../ I don't mind... Shut up...\par
-1-male_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I... I can't wait to see this...\par
-1-male_small_crotch_is_visible=appreciative,It's so cute! I can't wait to suck it!\par
-1-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=happy,That's a nice cock you have, ~name~... Does it play well with princess pussies?\par
-1-male_large_crotch_is_visible=horny,That massive cock may be too much for me, but I'll still try to take it up the ass for you, ~name~.\par
-1-male_chest_will_be_visible=shy,I'm... Kind of... Inexperienced at this...\par
-1-male_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,Wow, ~name~... You're cute...\par
-1-male_crotch_will_be_visible=embarrassed,I TALKED A BIG GAME, BUT I'M OUT OF MY DEPTH! I'VE NEVER SEEN A PENIS IN PERSON BEFORE!\par
-1-male_small_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so cute... May I touch it, ~name~.\par
-1-male_medium_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,It's so sexy... I want to ride it...\par
-1-male_large_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,~name~... May I please try to... Take that thing, um... Anally..?\par
\par
\par
-1-female_chest_will_be_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! ~name~ must now take off her top! Wonderful!\par
-1-female_small_chest_is_visible=gloating,That't it?! Puberty was not kind to you, was it ~name~? OHOHOHOHO!!!\par
-1-female_medium_chest_is_visible=shy,Why do YOUR breasts get to be so big...\par
-1-female_large_chest_is_visible=angry,Fuck off! You don't deserve to have tits so big! I do!\par
-1-female_crotch_will_be_visible=gloating,Expose your cute, little pussy, ~name~.\par
-1-female_crotch_is_visible=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! How delicious to see your womanhood!\par
-1-female_chest_will_be_visible=interested,What a beautiful sight! ~name~ must bare her breasts!\par
-1-female_small_chest_is_visible=horny,Small breasts are more sensitive. Don't believe me? Let me show you...\par
-1-female_medium_chest_is_visible=horny,They look so nice and full... I want to suck on your teats, ~name~.\par
-1-female_large_chest_is_visible=horny,SO BIG! I really want some time alone with them, ~name~.\par
-1-female_crotch_will_be_visible=interested,I've been waiting for this...\par
-1-female_crotch_is_visible=horny,~name~... You're so sexy... Please let me taste your cute, little slit...\par
-1-female_chest_will_be_visible=happy,About time we see your tits, ~name~.\par
-1-female_small_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Thanks for exposing those little gems, ~name~.\par
-1-female_medium_chest_is_visible=appreciative,Those beautiful orbs need their nipples flicked. Come over here, ~name~.\par
-1-female_large_chest_is_visible=shy,Those are so big... I really want to feel them...\par
-1-female_crotch_will_be_visible=calm,Just get on with it!\par
-1-female_crotch_is_visible=shy,It's so pretty... I-I mean G-Get on your knees!\par
-1-female_chest_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show us your teats...\par
-1-female_small_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,W-Why am I so turned on by those little breasts?!\par
-1-female_medium_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,They're so cute! I'm getting so wet!\par
-1-female_large_chest_is_visible=embarrassed,OH! They're so much better than mine!\par
-1-female_crotch_will_be_visible=shy,J-Just show it off already!\par
-1-female_crotch_is_visible=embarrassed,Why is your pussy so pretty, ~name~? I want to go deep in there and suckle on your little clit...\par
-1-female_chest_will_be_visible=excited,About time!  you've not been topless yet, ~name~, and we've been waiting!\par
-1-female_small_chest_is_visible=excited,YES! BARE YOUR CUTER, LITTLE BOOBIES TO THE WORLD!\par
-1-female_medium_chest_is_visible=excited,Those are so, so , so cute! you're too sexy, ~name~!\par
-1-female_large_chest_is_visible=excited,Thoae are sdo big and beautiful! You should be proud, ~name~!\par
-1-female_crotch_will_be_visible=excited,Time to show us your pussy, ~name~!\par
-1-female_crotch_is_visible=excited,YES! ~name~'s pussy is soooo cute!\par
\par
-1-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! Zizou! Show us your breasts now! I command it!\par
-1-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Show us those massive mounds, Sola!\par
-1-female_chest_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose yourself to us, Blad! Those broker boobies are begging to be bared!\par
-1-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Joy of joys! The goddess Zizou's itty bitty boobies are now visible to the world!\par
-1-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How wonderful! The breasts of an aristocrat's daughter are visible for all of us to see!\par
-1-female_small_chest_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Exposed breasts are nice, But you put on a show as you bare them, Blad, and that makes it so much better.\par
-1-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Time to see the pussy of a goddess, Eh, Zizou?\par
-1-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:sola=gloating,Why so shy, Sola? Afraid to show us all your pussy?\par
-1-female_crotch_will_be_visible,target:blad=gloating,Expose your pussy for us, Blad! I demand it!\par
-1-female_crotch_is_visible,target:zizou=gloating,Wonderful! And as trimmed as I had hoped!\par
-1-female_crotch_is_visible,target:sola=gloating,How delicious! Your pussy is so cute, Sola, and yet you'reso embarrassed!\par
-1-female_crotch_is_visible,target:blad=gloating,Thank you for the wonderful show, Blad!\par
\par
\par
\par
#OPPONENT MASTURBATING\par
#When an opponent is naked and loses a hand, they have lost the game and must pay the penalty by masturbating in front of everyone.\par
#The "must_masturbate" line is for just before it happens, and the "start_masturbating" line immediately follows.\par
#The "masturbating" line will be spoken a little after the opponent has started but before they climax.\par
#When the opponent climaxes, your character will say the "finished_masturbating" line.\par
\par
#stage-generic lines that will be used for every individual stage that doesn't have a line written\par
\par
male_must_masturbate=interested,What the character says when a male character has lost a hand while nude, and must masturbate.\par
male_start_masturbating=horny,What the character says when a male character has started masturbating.\par
male_masturbating=horny,What the character says while a male character is masturbating.\par
male_finished_masturbating=shocked,What the character says when a male character "finishes" masturbating.\par
\par
female_must_masturbate=interested,What the character says when a female character has lost a hand while nude, and must masturbate.\par
female_start_masturbating=horny,What the character says when a female character has started masturbating.\par
female_masturbating=horny,What the character says while a female character is masturbating.\par
female_finished_masturbating=shocked,What the character says when a female character "finishes" masturbating.\par
\par
#stage-specific lines that override the stage-generic ones\par
\par
#fully clothed\par
0-male_must_masturbate=interested,Oh,yes, ~name~... Begin to commit such a lewd act for me...\par
0-male_start_masturbating=interested,I didn't think it would be this sexy...\par
0-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Keep going... I've actually started a little bit too...\par
0-male_masturbating=horny,Keep... Going... ~name~...\par
0-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Your cock is too cute...\par
0-male_masturbating=horny,Nice technique! May I try to make you cum?\par
0-male_masturbating=horny,This looks fun and all, but wouldn't you rather stick that rod of yours in between my royal my royal pussy lips?\par
0-male_finished_masturbating=shocked,OH! SO MUCH IS COMINGOUT OF YOU! H-HOW LEWD!\par
0-male_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
0-male_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
0-male_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
0-male_masturbating=happy,You're being cuter than I thought you'd be, ~name~.\par
0-male_masturbating=gloating,Stroke! Stroke! Stroke! Good pet! Don't stop!\par
0-male_masturbating=interested,I bet that'd feel sooo good pumping in and out of my little cunt... Or my royal anus...\par
0-male_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! You're making the lewdest noises I've ever heard!\par
0-male_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! What a lewd show! Shower the floor with your cum! That's it! OH, YES!!!\par
0-male_must_masturbate=angry,I-I am not that interested in you, ~name~! I don't care if you're jerking yourself off!\par
0-male_start_masturbating=angry,You PERVERT! How DARE you start playing with your little... P-Penis... In front of me!\par
0-male_masturbating=shy,K-Keep going... I never said to stop...\par
0-male_masturbating=shy,H-How lewd...\par
0-male_masturbating=embarrassed,I can't believe you're doing this!\par
0-male_masturbating=shy,(Ah, it's so cute... But I can't let him know how horny he's making me...)\par
0-male_masturbating=embarrassed,T-This is too lewd for me! I-I can't look!\par
0-male_finished_masturbating=shy,You were... P-Pretty good... Y-Your princess approves.\par
\par
0-female_must_masturbate=interested,Yes, ~name~. Now is the time for you to cum.\par
0-female_start_masturbating=interested,You're jilling off SO eagerly, ~name~.\par
0-female_masturbating=horny,Oh, yes, stroke your slit, ~name~.\par
0-female_masturbating=horny,Flick your bean for the future queen!\par
0-female_masturbating=horny,Tease your little cunt for me, ~name~...\par
0-female_masturbating=horny,I bet that pussy can spread farther than that. Here. Let me try...\par
0-female_masturbating=horny,You're getting so red in the face... It won't be too long now...\par
0-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,S-So lewd! I've never seen a girl squirt so much before!\par
0-female_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
0-female_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
0-female_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
0-female_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO! LOOK HOW LEWD ARE YOU BEING, MY LITTLE PET!\par
0-female_masturbating=happy,You've not been cuter, ~name~.\par
0-female_masturbating=intertested,First you stripped for me, now you will cum for me.\par
0-female_masturbating=appreciative,Thank you for the lewd noises, ~name~. I'll think of them when I masturbate next.\par
0-female_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! SQUIRT OUT YOUR PUSSY MILK! YES! SQUIRT IT OUT ALL OVER YOUR THIGHS!\par
0-female_must_masturbate=calm,You're fingering yourself in front of a princess without permission?\par
0-female_start_masturbating=calm,Well you BETTER be good if you don't want to face the consequences.\par
0-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're really good at this...\par
0-female_masturbating=interested,I never knew how much I wanted to see ~name~ play with her pussy...\par
0-female_masturbating=horny,OH, YES! STROKE YOUR SLIT! OH, YES!\par
0-female_masturbating=embarrassed,OH MY! I COULD NEVER DO SOMETHING SO  LEWD WITH SO MUCH\par
0-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're ADORABLE, ~name~!\par
0-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,WOW! SO MUCH CUM IS SQUIRTING OUT OF YOU!\par
\par
0-female_must_masturbate,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO! Do you know how long I've waited to see this, Zizou? My rival brought so low as to cum for me?\par
0-female_start_masturbating,target:zizou=calm,Now START!\par
0-female_masturbating,target:zizou=interested,Oooooh... It's better than I had dreamed it would be...\par
0-female_masturbating,target:zizou=gloating,Tease your slit, rub your clit, and make sure to scream for me when you cum!\par
0-female_masturbating,target:zizou=happy,You're ridiculously cute, Zizou. This is a dream come true.\par
0-female_masturbating,target:zizou=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Zizou. I will never forget this.\par
0-female_masturbating,target:zizou=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
0-female_finished_masturbating,target:zizou=shocked,S-SO MUCH JIZZ! YOU'RE QUITE A LEWD GODDESS!\par
\par
0-female_must_masturbate,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! SOLA THE STUDENT! NOW YOU MUST STROKE YOUR SLIT FOR ME!\par
0-female_start_masturbating,target:sola=calm,Shall we begin, Sola?\par
0-female_masturbating,target:sola=interested,Oh... How sweet this is to see. Sola going fingers deep...\par
0-female_masturbating,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! Such a shameful display from such an innocent girl!\par
0-female_masturbating,target:sola=happy,Do you like being so lewd, Sola?\par
0-female_masturbating,target:sola=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Sola. I will never forget this.\par
0-female_masturbating,target:sola=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
0-female_finished_masturbating,target:sola=shocked,OH MY! YOU'RE SO QUICK TO CUM, SOLA!\par
\par
0-female_must_masturbate,target:blad=gloating,Put on a show for us, Blad!\par
0-female_start_masturbating,target:blad=calm,You're doing very well, Blad.\par
0-female_masturbating,target:blad=interested,I really want to taste your wet pussy, Blad. May I?\par
0-female_masturbating,target:blad=gloating,Show us your most lewd face, Blad!\par
0-female_masturbating,target:blad=happy,I am gvreatly enjoying this, Blad.\par
0-female_masturbating,target:blad=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Blad. I will never forget this.\par
0-female_masturbating,target:blad=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
0-female_finished_masturbating,target:blad=horny,So... Good... You must be a proffessional, Blad.\par
\par
#lost 1 item\par
1-male_must_masturbate=interested,Oh,yes, ~name~... Begin to commit such a lewd act for me...\par
1-male_start_masturbating=interested,I didn't think it would be this sexy...\par
1-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Keep going... I've actually started a little bit too...\par
1-male_masturbating=horny,Keep... Going... ~name~...\par
1-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Your cock is too cute...\par
1-male_masturbating=horny,Nice technique! May I try to make you cum?\par
1-male_masturbating=horny,This looks fun and all, but wouldn't you rather stick that rod of yours in between my royal my royal pussy lips?\par
1-male_finished_masturbating=shocked,OH! SO MUCH IS COMINGOUT OF YOU! H-HOW LEWD!\par
1-male_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
1-male_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
1-male_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
1-male_masturbating=happy,You're being cuter than I thought you'd be, ~name~.\par
1-male_masturbating=gloating,Stroke! Stroke! Stroke! Good pet! Don't stop!\par
1-male_masturbating=interested,I bet that'd feel sooo good pumping in and out of my little cunt... Or my royal anus...\par
1-male_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! You're making the lewdest noises I've ever heard!\par
1-male_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! What a lewd show! Shower the floor with your cum! That's it! OH, YES!!!\par
1-male_must_masturbate=angry,I-I am not that interested in you, ~name~! I don't care if you're jerking yourself off!\par
1-male_start_masturbating=angry,You PERVERT! How DARE you start playing with your little... P-Penis... In front of me!\par
1-male_masturbating=shy,K-Keep going... I never said to stop...\par
1-male_masturbating=shy,H-How lewd...\par
1-male_masturbating=embarrassed,I can't believe you're doing this!\par
1-male_masturbating=shy,(Ah, it's so cute... But I can't let him know how horny he's making me...)\par
1-male_masturbating=embarrassed,T-This is too lewd for me! I-I can't look!\par
1-male_finished_masturbating=shy,You were... P-Pretty good... Y-Your princess approves.\par
\par
1-female_must_masturbate=interested,Yes, ~name~. Now is the time for you to cum.\par
1-female_start_masturbating=interested,You're jilling off SO eagerly, ~name~.\par
1-female_masturbating=horny,Oh, yes, stroke your slit, ~name~.\par
1-female_masturbating=horny,Flick your bean for the future queen!\par
1-female_masturbating=horny,Tease your little cunt for me, ~name~...\par
1-female_masturbating=horny,I bet that pussy can spread farther than that. Here. Let me try...\par
1-female_masturbating=horny,You're getting so red in the face... It won't be too long now...\par
1-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,S-So lewd! I've never seen a girl squirt so much before!\par
1-female_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
1-female_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
1-female_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
1-female_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO! LOOK HOW LEWD ARE YOU BEING, MY LITTLE PET!\par
1-female_masturbating=happy,You've not been cuter, ~name~.\par
1-female_masturbating=intertested,First you stripped for me, now you will cum for me.\par
1-female_masturbating=appreciative,Thank you for the lewd noises, ~name~. I'll think of them when I masturbate next.\par
1-female_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! SQUIRT OUT YOUR PUSSY MILK! YES! SQUIRT IT OUT ALL OVER YOUR THIGHS!\par
1-female_must_masturbate=calm,You're fingering yourself in front of a princess without permission?\par
1-female_start_masturbating=calm,Well you BETTER be good if you don't want to face the consequences.\par
1-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're really good at this...\par
1-female_masturbating=interested,I never knew how much I wanted to see ~name~ play with her pussy...\par
1-female_masturbating=horny,OH, YES! STROKE YOUR SLIT! OH, YES!\par
1-female_masturbating=embarrassed,OH MY! I COULD NEVER DO SOMETHING SO  LEWD WITH SO MUCH\par
1-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're ADORABLE, ~name~!\par
1-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,WOW! SO MUCH CUM IS SQUIRTING OUT OF YOU!\par
\par
1-female_must_masturbate,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO! Do you know how long I've waited to see this, Zizou? My rival brought so low as to cum for me?\par
1-female_start_masturbating,target:zizou=calm,Now START!\par
1-female_masturbating,target:zizou=interested,Oooooh... It's better than I had dreamed it would be...\par
1-female_masturbating,target:zizou=gloating,Tease your slit, rub your clit, and make sure to scream for me when you cum!\par
1-female_masturbating,target:zizou=happy,You're ridiculously cute, Zizou. This is a dream come true.\par
1-female_masturbating,target:zizou=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Zizou. I will never forget this.\par
1-female_masturbating,target:zizou=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
1-female_finished_masturbating,target:zizou=shocked,S-SO MUCH JIZZ! YOU'RE QUITE A LEWD GODDESS!\par
\par
1-female_must_masturbate,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! SOLA THE STUDENT! NOW YOU MUST STROKE YOUR SLIT FOR ME!\par
1-female_start_masturbating,target:sola=calm,Shall we begin, Sola?\par
1-female_masturbating,target:sola=interested,Oh... How sweet this is to see. Sola going fingers deep...\par
1-female_masturbating,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! Such a shameful display from such an innocent girl!\par
1-female_masturbating,target:sola=happy,Do you like being so lewd, Sola?\par
1-female_masturbating,target:sola=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Sola. I will never forget this.\par
1-female_masturbating,target:sola=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
1-female_finished_masturbating,target:sola=shocked,OH MY! YOU'RE SO QUICK TO CUM, SOLA!\par
\par
1-female_must_masturbate,target:blad=gloating,Put on a show for us, Blad!\par
1-female_start_masturbating,target:blad=calm,You're doing very well, Blad.\par
1-female_masturbating,target:blad=interested,I really want to taste your wet pussy, Blad. May I?\par
1-female_masturbating,target:blad=gloating,Show us your most lewd face, Blad!\par
1-female_masturbating,target:blad=happy,I am gvreatly enjoying this, Blad.\par
1-female_masturbating,target:blad=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Blad. I will never forget this.\par
1-female_masturbating,target:blad=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
1-female_finished_masturbating,target:blad=horny,So... Good... You must be a proffessional, Blad.\par
\par
#lost 2 items\par
2-male_must_masturbate=interested,Oh,yes, ~name~... Begin to commit such a lewd act for me...\par
2-male_start_masturbating=interested,I didn't think it would be this sexy...\par
2-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Keep going... I've actually started a little bit too...\par
2-male_masturbating=horny,Keep... Going... ~name~...\par
2-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Your cock is too cute...\par
2-male_masturbating=horny,Nice technique! May I try to make you cum?\par
2-male_masturbating=horny,This looks fun and all, but wouldn't you rather stick that rod of yours in between my royal my royal pussy lips?\par
2-male_finished_masturbating=shocked,OH! SO MUCH IS COMINGOUT OF YOU! H-HOW LEWD!\par
2-male_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
2-male_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
2-male_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
2-male_masturbating=happy,You're being cuter than I thought you'd be, ~name~.\par
2-male_masturbating=gloating,Stroke! Stroke! Stroke! Good pet! Don't stop!\par
2-male_masturbating=interested,I bet that'd feel sooo good pumping in and out of my little cunt... Or my royal anus...\par
2-male_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! You're making the lewdest noises I've ever heard!\par
2-male_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! What a lewd show! Shower the floor with your cum! That's it! OH, YES!!!\par
2-male_must_masturbate=angry,I-I am not that interested in you, ~name~! I don't care if you're jerking yourself off!\par
2-male_start_masturbating=angry,You PERVERT! How DARE you start playing with your little... P-Penis... In front of me!\par
2-male_masturbating=shy,K-Keep going... I never said to stop...\par
2-male_masturbating=shy,H-How lewd...\par
2-male_masturbating=embarrassed,I can't believe you're doing this!\par
2-male_masturbating=shy,(Ah, it's so cute... But I can't let him know how horny he's making me...)\par
2-male_masturbating=embarrassed,T-This is too lewd for me! I-I can't look!\par
2-male_finished_masturbating=shy,You were... P-Pretty good... Y-Your princess approves.\par
\par
2-female_must_masturbate=interested,Yes, ~name~. Now is the time for you to cum.\par
2-female_start_masturbating=interested,You're jilling off SO eagerly, ~name~.\par
2-female_masturbating=horny,Oh, yes, stroke your slit, ~name~.\par
2-female_masturbating=horny,Flick your bean for the future queen!\par
2-female_masturbating=horny,Tease your little cunt for me, ~name~...\par
2-female_masturbating=horny,I bet that pussy can spread farther than that. Here. Let me try...\par
2-female_masturbating=horny,You're getting so red in the face... It won't be too long now...\par
2-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,S-So lewd! I've never seen a girl squirt so much before!\par
2-female_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
2-female_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
2-female_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
2-female_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO! LOOK HOW LEWD ARE YOU BEING, MY LITTLE PET!\par
2-female_masturbating=happy,You've not been cuter, ~name~.\par
2-female_masturbating=intertested,First you stripped for me, now you will cum for me.\par
2-female_masturbating=appreciative,Thank you for the lewd noises, ~name~. I'll think of them when I masturbate next.\par
2-female_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! SQUIRT OUT YOUR PUSSY MILK! YES! SQUIRT IT OUT ALL OVER YOUR THIGHS!\par
2-female_must_masturbate=calm,You're fingering yourself in front of a princess without permission?\par
2-female_start_masturbating=calm,Well you BETTER be good if you don't want to face the consequences.\par
2-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're really good at this...\par
2-female_masturbating=interested,I never knew how much I wanted to see ~name~ play with her pussy...\par
2-female_masturbating=horny,OH, YES! STROKE YOUR SLIT! OH, YES!\par
2-female_masturbating=embarrassed,OH MY! I COULD NEVER DO SOMETHING SO  LEWD WITH SO MUCH\par
2-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're ADORABLE, ~name~!\par
2-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,WOW! SO MUCH CUM IS SQUIRTING OUT OF YOU!\par
\par
2-female_must_masturbate,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO! Do you know how long I've waited to see this, Zizou? My rival brought so low as to cum for me?\par
2-female_start_masturbating,target:zizou=calm,Now START!\par
2-female_masturbating,target:zizou=interested,Oooooh... It's better than I had dreamed it would be...\par
2-female_masturbating,target:zizou=gloating,Tease your slit, rub your clit, and make sure to scream for me when you cum!\par
2-female_masturbating,target:zizou=happy,You're ridiculously cute, Zizou. This is a dream come true.\par
2-female_masturbating,target:zizou=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Zizou. I will never forget this.\par
2-female_masturbating,target:zizou=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
2-female_finished_masturbating,target:zizou=shocked,S-SO MUCH JIZZ! YOU'RE QUITE A LEWD GODDESS!\par
\par
2-female_must_masturbate,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! SOLA THE STUDENT! NOW YOU MUST STROKE YOUR SLIT FOR ME!\par
2-female_start_masturbating,target:sola=calm,Shall we begin, Sola?\par
2-female_masturbating,target:sola=interested,Oh... How sweet this is to see. Sola going fingers deep...\par
2-female_masturbating,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! Such a shameful display from such an innocent girl!\par
2-female_masturbating,target:sola=happy,Do you like being so lewd, Sola?\par
2-female_masturbating,target:sola=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Sola. I will never forget this.\par
2-female_masturbating,target:sola=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
2-female_finished_masturbating,target:sola=shocked,OH MY! YOU'RE SO QUICK TO CUM, SOLA!\par
\par
2-female_must_masturbate,target:blad=gloating,Put on a show for us, Blad!\par
2-female_start_masturbating,target:blad=calm,You're doing very well, Blad.\par
2-female_masturbating,target:blad=interested,I really want to taste your wet pussy, Blad. May I?\par
2-female_masturbating,target:blad=gloating,Show us your most lewd face, Blad!\par
2-female_masturbating,target:blad=happy,I am gvreatly enjoying this, Blad.\par
2-female_masturbating,target:blad=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Blad. I will never forget this.\par
2-female_masturbating,target:blad=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
2-female_finished_masturbating,target:blad=horny,So... Good... You must be a proffessional, Blad.\par
\par
#lost 3 items\par
3-male_must_masturbate=interested,Oh,yes, ~name~... Begin to commit such a lewd act for me...\par
3-male_start_masturbating=interested,I didn't think it would be this sexy...\par
3-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Keep going... I've actually started a little bit too...\par
3-male_masturbating=horny,Keep... Going... ~name~...\par
3-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Your cock is too cute...\par
3-male_masturbating=horny,Nice technique! May I try to make you cum?\par
3-male_masturbating=horny,This looks fun and all, but wouldn't you rather stick that rod of yours in between my royal my royal pussy lips?\par
3-male_finished_masturbating=shocked,OH! SO MUCH IS COMINGOUT OF YOU! H-HOW LEWD!\par
3-male_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
3-male_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
3-male_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
3-male_masturbating=happy,You're being cuter than I thought you'd be, ~name~.\par
3-male_masturbating=gloating,Stroke! Stroke! Stroke! Good pet! Don't stop!\par
3-male_masturbating=interested,I bet that'd feel sooo good pumping in and out of my little cunt... Or my royal anus...\par
3-male_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! You're making the lewdest noises I've ever heard!\par
3-male_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! What a lewd show! Shower the floor with your cum! That's it! OH, YES!!!\par
3-male_must_masturbate=angry,I-I am not that interested in you, ~name~! I don't care if you're jerking yourself off!\par
3-male_start_masturbating=angry,You PERVERT! How DARE you start playing with your little... P-Penis... In front of me!\par
3-male_masturbating=shy,K-Keep going... I never said to stop...\par
3-male_masturbating=shy,H-How lewd...\par
3-male_masturbating=embarrassed,I can't believe you're doing this!\par
3-male_masturbating=shy,(Ah, it's so cute... But I can't let him know how horny he's making me...)\par
3-male_masturbating=embarrassed,T-This is too lewd for me! I-I can't look!\par
3-male_finished_masturbating=shy,You were... P-Pretty good... Y-Your princess approves.\par
\par
3-female_must_masturbate=interested,Yes, ~name~. Now is the time for you to cum.\par
3-female_start_masturbating=interested,You're jilling off SO eagerly, ~name~.\par
3-female_masturbating=horny,Oh, yes, stroke your slit, ~name~.\par
3-female_masturbating=horny,Flick your bean for the future queen!\par
3-female_masturbating=horny,Tease your little cunt for me, ~name~...\par
3-female_masturbating=horny,I bet that pussy can spread farther than that. Here. Let me try...\par
3-female_masturbating=horny,You're getting so red in the face... It won't be too long now...\par
3-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,S-So lewd! I've never seen a girl squirt so much before!\par
3-female_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
3-female_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
3-female_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
3-female_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO! LOOK HOW LEWD ARE YOU BEING, MY LITTLE PET!\par
3-female_masturbating=happy,You've not been cuter, ~name~.\par
3-female_masturbating=intertested,First you stripped for me, now you will cum for me.\par
3-female_masturbating=appreciative,Thank you for the lewd noises, ~name~. I'll think of them when I masturbate next.\par
3-female_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! SQUIRT OUT YOUR PUSSY MILK! YES! SQUIRT IT OUT ALL OVER YOUR THIGHS!\par
3-female_must_masturbate=calm,You're fingering yourself in front of a princess without permission?\par
3-female_start_masturbating=calm,Well you BETTER be good if you don't want to face the consequences.\par
3-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're really good at this...\par
3-female_masturbating=interested,I never knew how much I wanted to see ~name~ play with her pussy...\par
3-female_masturbating=horny,OH, YES! STROKE YOUR SLIT! OH, YES!\par
3-female_masturbating=embarrassed,OH MY! I COULD NEVER DO SOMETHING SO  LEWD WITH SO MUCH\par
3-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're ADORABLE, ~name~!\par
3-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,WOW! SO MUCH CUM IS SQUIRTING OUT OF YOU!\par
\par
3-female_must_masturbate,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO! Do you know how long I've waited to see this, Zizou? My rival brought so low as to cum for me?\par
3-female_start_masturbating,target:zizou=calm,Now START!\par
3-female_masturbating,target:zizou=interested,Oooooh... It's better than I had dreamed it would be...\par
3-female_masturbating,target:zizou=gloating,Tease your slit, rub your clit, and make sure to scream for me when you cum!\par
3-female_masturbating,target:zizou=happy,You're ridiculously cute, Zizou. This is a dream come true.\par
3-female_masturbating,target:zizou=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Zizou. I will never forget this.\par
3-female_masturbating,target:zizou=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
3-female_finished_masturbating,target:zizou=shocked,S-SO MUCH JIZZ! YOU'RE QUITE A LEWD GODDESS!\par
\par
3-female_must_masturbate,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! SOLA THE STUDENT! NOW YOU MUST STROKE YOUR SLIT FOR ME!\par
3-female_start_masturbating,target:sola=calm,Shall we begin, Sola?\par
3-female_masturbating,target:sola=interested,Oh... How sweet this is to see. Sola going fingers deep...\par
3-female_masturbating,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! Such a shameful display from such an innocent girl!\par
3-female_masturbating,target:sola=happy,Do you like being so lewd, Sola?\par
3-female_masturbating,target:sola=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Sola. I will never forget this.\par
3-female_masturbating,target:sola=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
3-female_finished_masturbating,target:sola=shocked,OH MY! YOU'RE SO QUICK TO CUM, SOLA!\par
\par
3-female_must_masturbate,target:blad=gloating,Put on a show for us, Blad!\par
3-female_start_masturbating,target:blad=calm,You're doing very well, Blad.\par
3-female_masturbating,target:blad=interested,I really want to taste your wet pussy, Blad. May I?\par
3-female_masturbating,target:blad=gloating,Show us your most lewd face, Blad!\par
3-female_masturbating,target:blad=happy,I am gvreatly enjoying this, Blad.\par
3-female_masturbating,target:blad=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Blad. I will never forget this.\par
3-female_masturbating,target:blad=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
3-female_finished_masturbating,target:blad=horny,So... Good... You must be a proffessional, Blad.\par
 \par
#lost 4 items\par
4-male_must_masturbate=interested,Oh,yes, ~name~... Begin to commit such a lewd act for me...\par
4-male_start_masturbating=interested,I didn't think it would be this sexy...\par
4-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Keep going... I've actually started a little bit too...\par
4-male_masturbating=horny,Keep... Going... ~name~...\par
4-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Your cock is too cute...\par
4-male_masturbating=horny,Nice technique! May I try to make you cum?\par
4-male_masturbating=horny,This looks fun and all, but wouldn't you rather stick that rod of yours in between my royal my royal pussy lips?\par
4-male_finished_masturbating=shocked,OH! SO MUCH IS COMINGOUT OF YOU! H-HOW LEWD!\par
4-male_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
4-male_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
4-male_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
4-male_masturbating=happy,You're being cuter than I thought you'd be, ~name~.\par
4-male_masturbating=gloating,Stroke! Stroke! Stroke! Good pet! Don't stop!\par
4-male_masturbating=interested,I bet that'd feel sooo good pumping in and out of my little cunt... Or my royal anus...\par
4-male_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! You're making the lewdest noises I've ever heard!\par
4-male_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! What a lewd show! Shower the floor with your cum! That's it! OH, YES!!!\par
4-male_must_masturbate=angry,I-I am not that interested in you, ~name~! I don't care if you're jerking yourself off!\par
4-male_start_masturbating=angry,You PERVERT! How DARE you start playing with your little... P-Penis... In front of me!\par
4-male_masturbating=shy,K-Keep going... I never said to stop...\par
4-male_masturbating=shy,H-How lewd...\par
4-male_masturbating=embarrassed,I can't believe you're doing this!\par
4-male_masturbating=shy,(Ah, it's so cute... But I can't let him know how horny he's making me...)\par
4-male_masturbating=embarrassed,T-This is too lewd for me! I-I can't look!\par
4-male_finished_masturbating=shy,You were... P-Pretty good... Y-Your princess approves.\par
\par
4-female_must_masturbate=interested,Yes, ~name~. Now is the time for you to cum.\par
4-female_start_masturbating=interested,You're jilling off SO eagerly, ~name~.\par
4-female_masturbating=horny,Oh, yes, stroke your slit, ~name~.\par
4-female_masturbating=horny,Flick your bean for the future queen!\par
4-female_masturbating=horny,Tease your little cunt for me, ~name~...\par
4-female_masturbating=horny,I bet that pussy can spread farther than that. Here. Let me try...\par
4-female_masturbating=horny,You're getting so red in the face... It won't be too long now...\par
4-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,S-So lewd! I've never seen a girl squirt so much before!\par
4-female_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
4-female_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
4-female_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
4-female_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO! LOOK HOW LEWD ARE YOU BEING, MY LITTLE PET!\par
4-female_masturbating=happy,You've not been cuter, ~name~.\par
4-female_masturbating=intertested,First you stripped for me, now you will cum for me.\par
4-female_masturbating=appreciative,Thank you for the lewd noises, ~name~. I'll think of them when I masturbate next.\par
4-female_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! SQUIRT OUT YOUR PUSSY MILK! YES! SQUIRT IT OUT ALL OVER YOUR THIGHS!\par
4-female_must_masturbate=calm,You're fingering yourself in front of a princess without permission?\par
4-female_start_masturbating=calm,Well you BETTER be good if you don't want to face the consequences.\par
4-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're really good at this...\par
4-female_masturbating=interested,I never knew how much I wanted to see ~name~ play with her pussy...\par
4-female_masturbating=horny,OH, YES! STROKE YOUR SLIT! OH, YES!\par
4-female_masturbating=embarrassed,OH MY! I COULD NEVER DO SOMETHING SO  LEWD WITH SO MUCH\par
4-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're ADORABLE, ~name~!\par
4-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,WOW! SO MUCH CUM IS SQUIRTING OUT OF YOU!\par
\par
4-female_must_masturbate,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO! Do you know how long I've waited to see this, Zizou? My rival brought so low as to cum for me?\par
4-female_start_masturbating,target:zizou=calm,Now START!\par
4-female_masturbating,target:zizou=interested,Oooooh... It's better than I had dreamed it would be...\par
4-female_masturbating,target:zizou=gloating,Tease your slit, rub your clit, and make sure to scream for me when you cum!\par
4-female_masturbating,target:zizou=happy,You're ridiculously cute, Zizou. This is a dream come true.\par
4-female_masturbating,target:zizou=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Zizou. I will never forget this.\par
4-female_masturbating,target:zizou=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
4-female_finished_masturbating,target:zizou=shocked,S-SO MUCH JIZZ! YOU'RE QUITE A LEWD GODDESS!\par
\par
4-female_must_masturbate,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! SOLA THE STUDENT! NOW YOU MUST STROKE YOUR SLIT FOR ME!\par
4-female_start_masturbating,target:sola=calm,Shall we begin, Sola?\par
4-female_masturbating,target:sola=interested,Oh... How sweet this is to see. Sola going fingers deep...\par
4-female_masturbating,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! Such a shameful display from such an innocent girl!\par
4-female_masturbating,target:sola=happy,Do you like being so lewd, Sola?\par
4-female_masturbating,target:sola=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Sola. I will never forget this.\par
4-female_masturbating,target:sola=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
4-female_finished_masturbating,target:sola=shocked,OH MY! YOU'RE SO QUICK TO CUM, SOLA!\par
\par
4-female_must_masturbate,target:blad=gloating,Put on a show for us, Blad!\par
4-female_start_masturbating,target:blad=calm,You're doing very well, Blad.\par
4-female_masturbating,target:blad=interested,I really want to taste your wet pussy, Blad. May I?\par
4-female_masturbating,target:blad=gloating,Show us your most lewd face, Blad!\par
4-female_masturbating,target:blad=happy,I am gvreatly enjoying this, Blad.\par
4-female_masturbating,target:blad=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Blad. I will never forget this.\par
4-female_masturbating,target:blad=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
4-female_finished_masturbating,target:blad=horny,So... Good... You must be a proffessional, Blad.\par
\par
#lost 5 items\par
\par
5-male_must_masturbate=interested,Oh,yes, ~name~... Begin to commit such a lewd act for me...\par
5-male_start_masturbating=interested,I didn't think it would be this sexy...\par
5-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Keep going... I've actually started a little bit too...\par
5-male_masturbating=horny,Keep... Going... ~name~...\par
5-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Your cock is too cute...\par
5-male_masturbating=horny,Nice technique! May I try to make you cum?\par
5-male_masturbating=horny,This looks fun and all, but wouldn't you rather stick that rod of yours in between my royal my royal pussy lips?\par
5-male_finished_masturbating=shocked,OH! SO MUCH IS COMINGOUT OF YOU! H-HOW LEWD!\par
5-male_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
5-male_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
5-male_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
5-male_masturbating=happy,You're being cuter than I thought you'd be, ~name~.\par
5-male_masturbating=gloating,Stroke! Stroke! Stroke! Good pet! Don't stop!\par
5-male_masturbating=interested,I bet that'd feel sooo good pumping in and out of my little cunt... Or my royal anus...\par
5-male_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! You're making the lewdest noises I've ever heard!\par
5-male_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! What a lewd show! Shower the floor with your cum! That's it! OH, YES!!!\par
5-male_must_masturbate=angry,I-I am not that interested in you, ~name~! I don't care if you're jerking yourself off!\par
5-male_start_masturbating=angry,You PERVERT! How DARE you start playing with your little... P-Penis... In front of me!\par
5-male_masturbating=shy,K-Keep going... I never said to stop...\par
5-male_masturbating=shy,H-How lewd...\par
5-male_masturbating=embarrassed,I can't believe you're doing this!\par
5-male_masturbating=shy,(Ah, it's so cute... But I can't let him know how horny he's making me...)\par
5-male_masturbating=embarrassed,T-This is too lewd for me! I-I can't look!\par
5-male_finished_masturbating=shy,You were... P-Pretty good... Y-Your princess approves.\par
\par
5-female_must_masturbate=interested,Yes, ~name~. Now is the time for you to cum.\par
5-female_start_masturbating=interested,You're jilling off SO eagerly, ~name~.\par
5-female_masturbating=horny,Oh, yes, stroke your slit, ~name~.\par
5-female_masturbating=horny,Flick your bean for the future queen!\par
5-female_masturbating=horny,Tease your little cunt for me, ~name~...\par
5-female_masturbating=horny,I bet that pussy can spread farther than that. Here. Let me try...\par
5-female_masturbating=horny,You're getting so red in the face... It won't be too long now...\par
5-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,S-So lewd! I've never seen a girl squirt so much before!\par
5-female_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
5-female_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
5-female_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
5-female_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO! LOOK HOW LEWD ARE YOU BEING, MY LITTLE PET!\par
5-female_masturbating=happy,You've not been cuter, ~name~.\par
5-female_masturbating=intertested,First you stripped for me, now you will cum for me.\par
5-female_masturbating=appreciative,Thank you for the lewd noises, ~name~. I'll think of them when I masturbate next.\par
5-female_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! SQUIRT OUT YOUR PUSSY MILK! YES! SQUIRT IT OUT ALL OVER YOUR THIGHS!\par
5-female_must_masturbate=calm,You're fingering yourself in front of a princess without permission?\par
5-female_start_masturbating=calm,Well you BETTER be good if you don't want to face the consequences.\par
5-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're really good at this...\par
5-female_masturbating=interested,I never knew how much I wanted to see ~name~ play with her pussy...\par
5-female_masturbating=horny,OH, YES! STROKE YOUR SLIT! OH, YES!\par
5-female_masturbating=embarrassed,OH MY! I COULD NEVER DO SOMETHING SO  LEWD WITH SO MUCH\par
5-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're ADORABLE, ~name~!\par
5-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,WOW! SO MUCH CUM IS SQUIRTING OUT OF YOU!\par
\par
5-female_must_masturbate,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO! Do you know how long I've waited to see this, Zizou? My rival brought so low as to cum for me?\par
5-female_start_masturbating,target:zizou=calm,Now START!\par
5-female_masturbating,target:zizou=interested,Oooooh... It's better than I had dreamed it would be...\par
5-female_masturbating,target:zizou=gloating,Tease your slit, rub your clit, and make sure to scream for me when you cum!\par
5-female_masturbating,target:zizou=happy,You're ridiculously cute, Zizou. This is a dream come true.\par
5-female_masturbating,target:zizou=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Zizou. I will never forget this.\par
5-female_masturbating,target:zizou=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
5-female_finished_masturbating,target:zizou=shocked,S-SO MUCH JIZZ! YOU'RE QUITE A LEWD GODDESS!\par
\par
5-female_must_masturbate,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! SOLA THE STUDENT! NOW YOU MUST STROKE YOUR SLIT FOR ME!\par
5-female_start_masturbating,target:sola=calm,Shall we begin, Sola?\par
5-female_masturbating,target:sola=interested,Oh... How sweet this is to see. Sola going fingers deep...\par
5-female_masturbating,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! Such a shameful display from such an innocent girl!\par
5-female_masturbating,target:sola=happy,Do you like being so lewd, Sola?\par
5-female_masturbating,target:sola=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Sola. I will never forget this.\par
5-female_masturbating,target:sola=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
5-female_finished_masturbating,target:sola=shocked,OH MY! YOU'RE SO QUICK TO CUM, SOLA!\par
\par
5-female_must_masturbate,target:blad=gloating,Put on a show for us, Blad!\par
5-female_start_masturbating,target:blad=calm,You're doing very well, Blad.\par
5-female_masturbating,target:blad=interested,I really want to taste your wet pussy, Blad. May I?\par
5-female_masturbating,target:blad=gloating,Show us your most lewd face, Blad!\par
5-female_masturbating,target:blad=happy,I am gvreatly enjoying this, Blad.\par
5-female_masturbating,target:blad=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Blad. I will never forget this.\par
5-female_masturbating,target:blad=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
5-female_finished_masturbating,target:blad=horny,So... Good... You must be a proffessional, Blad.\par
\par
\par
#nude\par
\par
-3-male_must_masturbate=interested,Oh,yes, ~name~... Begin to commit such a lewd act for me...\par
-3-male_start_masturbating=interested,I didn't think it would be this sexy...\par
-3-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Keep going... I've actually started a little bit too...\par
-3-male_masturbating=horny,Keep... Going... ~name~...\par
-3-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Your cock is too cute...\par
-3-male_masturbating=horny,Nice technique! May I try to make you cum?\par
-3-male_masturbating=horny,This looks fun and all, but wouldn't you rather stick that rod of yours in between my royal my royal pussy lips?\par
-3-male_finished_masturbating=shocked,OH! SO MUCH IS COMINGOUT OF YOU! H-HOW LEWD!\par
-3-male_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
-3-male_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
-3-male_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
-3-male_masturbating=happy,You're being cuter than I thought you'd be, ~name~.\par
-3-male_masturbating=gloating,Stroke! Stroke! Stroke! Good pet! Don't stop!\par
-3-male_masturbating=interested,I bet that'd feel sooo good pumping in and out of my little cunt... Or my royal anus...\par
-3-male_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! You're making the lewdest noises I've ever heard!\par
-3-male_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! What a lewd show! Shower the floor with your cum! That's it! OH, YES!!!\par
-3-male_must_masturbate=angry,I-I am not that interested in you, ~name~! I don't care if you're jerking yourself off!\par
-3-male_start_masturbating=angry,You PERVERT! How DARE you start playing with your little... P-Penis... In front of me!\par
-3-male_masturbating=shy,K-Keep going... I never said to stop...\par
-3-male_masturbating=shy,H-How lewd...\par
-3-male_masturbating=embarrassed,I can't believe you're doing this!\par
-3-male_masturbating=shy,(Ah, it's so cute... But I can't let him know how horny he's making me...)\par
-3-male_masturbating=embarrassed,T-This is too lewd for me! I-I can't look!\par
-3-male_finished_masturbating=shy,You were... P-Pretty good... Y-Your princess approves.\par
\par
-3-female_must_masturbate=interested,Yes, ~name~. Now is the time for you to cum.\par
-3-female_start_masturbating=interested,You're jilling off SO eagerly, ~name~.\par
-3-female_masturbating=horny,Oh, yes, stroke your slit, ~name~.\par
-3-female_masturbating=horny,Flick your bean for the future queen!\par
-3-female_masturbating=horny,Tease your little cunt for me, ~name~...\par
-3-female_masturbating=horny,I bet that pussy can spread farther than that. Here. Let me try...\par
-3-female_masturbating=horny,You're getting so red in the face... It won't be too long now...\par
-3-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,S-So lewd! I've never seen a girl squirt so much before!\par
-3-female_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
-3-female_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
-3-female_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
-3-female_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO! LOOK HOW LEWD ARE YOU BEING, MY LITTLE PET!\par
-3-female_masturbating=happy,You've not been cuter, ~name~.\par
-3-female_masturbating=intertested,First you stripped for me, now you will cum for me.\par
-3-female_masturbating=appreciative,Thank you for the lewd noises, ~name~. I'll think of them when I masturbate next.\par
-3-female_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! SQUIRT OUT YOUR PUSSY MILK! YES! SQUIRT IT OUT ALL OVER YOUR THIGHS!\par
-3-female_must_masturbate=calm,You're fingering yourself in front of a princess without permission?\par
-3-female_start_masturbating=calm,Well you BETTER be good if you don't want to face the consequences.\par
-3-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're really good at this...\par
-3-female_masturbating=interested,I never knew how much I wanted to see ~name~ play with her pussy...\par
-3-female_masturbating=horny,OH, YES! STROKE YOUR SLIT! OH, YES!\par
-3-female_masturbating=embarrassed,OH MY! I COULD NEVER DO SOMETHING SO  LEWD WITH SO MUCH\par
-3-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're ADORABLE, ~name~!\par
-3-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,WOW! SO MUCH CUM IS SQUIRTING OUT OF YOU!\par
\par
-3-female_must_masturbate,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO! Do you know how long I've waited to see this, Zizou? My rival brought so low as to cum for me?\par
-3-female_start_masturbating,target:zizou=calm,Now START!\par
-3-female_masturbating,target:zizou=interested,Oooooh... It's better than I had dreamed it would be...\par
-3-female_masturbating,target:zizou=gloating,Tease your slit, rub your clit, and make sure to scream for me when you cum!\par
-3-female_masturbating,target:zizou=happy,You're ridiculously cute, Zizou. This is a dream come true.\par
-3-female_masturbating,target:zizou=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Zizou. I will never forget this.\par
-3-female_masturbating,target:zizou=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
-3-female_finished_masturbating,target:zizou=shocked,S-SO MUCH JIZZ! YOU'RE QUITE A LEWD GODDESS!\par
\par
-3-female_must_masturbate,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! SOLA THE STUDENT! NOW YOU MUST STROKE YOUR SLIT FOR ME!\par
-3-female_start_masturbating,target:sola=calm,Shall we begin, Sola?\par
-3-female_masturbating,target:sola=interested,Oh... How sweet this is to see. Sola going fingers deep...\par
-3-female_masturbating,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! Such a shameful display from such an innocent girl!\par
-3-female_masturbating,target:sola=happy,Do you like being so lewd, Sola?\par
-3-female_masturbating,target:sola=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Sola. I will never forget this.\par
-3-female_masturbating,target:sola=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
-3-female_finished_masturbating,target:sola=shocked,OH MY! YOU'RE SO QUICK TO CUM, SOLA!\par
\par
-3-female_must_masturbate,target:blad=gloating,Put on a show for us, Blad!\par
-3-female_start_masturbating,target:blad=calm,You're doing very well, Blad.\par
-3-female_masturbating,target:blad=interested,I really want to taste your wet pussy, Blad. May I?\par
-3-female_masturbating,target:blad=gloating,Show us your most lewd face, Blad!\par
-3-female_masturbating,target:blad=happy,I am gvreatly enjoying this, Blad.\par
-3-female_masturbating,target:blad=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Blad. I will never forget this.\par
-3-female_masturbating,target:blad=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
-3-female_finished_masturbating,target:blad=horny,So... Good... You must be a proffessional, Blad.\par
\par
#masturbating\par
-2-male_must_masturbate=interested,Oh,yes, ~name~... Begin to commit such a lewd act for me...\par
-2-male_start_masturbating=interested,I didn't think it would be this sexy...\par
-2-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Keep going... I've actually started a little bit too...\par
-2-male_masturbating=horny,Keep... Going... ~name~...\par
-2-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Your cock is too cute...\par
-2-male_masturbating=horny,Nice technique! May I try to make you cum?\par
-2-male_masturbating=horny,This looks fun and all, but wouldn't you rather stick that rod of yours in between my royal my royal pussy lips?\par
-2-male_finished_masturbating=shocked,OH! SO MUCH IS COMINGOUT OF YOU! H-HOW LEWD!\par
-2-male_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
-2-male_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
-2-male_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
-2-male_masturbating=happy,You're being cuter than I thought you'd be, ~name~.\par
-2-male_masturbating=gloating,Stroke! Stroke! Stroke! Good pet! Don't stop!\par
-2-male_masturbating=interested,I bet that'd feel sooo good pumping in and out of my little cunt... Or my royal anus...\par
-2-male_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! You're making the lewdest noises I've ever heard!\par
-2-male_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! What a lewd show! Shower the floor with your cum! That's it! OH, YES!!!\par
-2-male_must_masturbate=angry,I-I am not that interested in you, ~name~! I don't care if you're jerking yourself off!\par
-2-male_start_masturbating=angry,You PERVERT! How DARE you start playing with your little... P-Penis... In front of me!\par
-2-male_masturbating=shy,K-Keep going... I never said to stop...\par
-2-male_masturbating=shy,H-How lewd...\par
-2-male_masturbating=embarrassed,I can't believe you're doing this!\par
-2-male_masturbating=shy,(Ah, it's so cute... But I can't let him know how horny he's making me...)\par
-2-male_masturbating=embarrassed,T-This is too lewd for me! I-I can't look!\par
-2-male_finished_masturbating=shy,You were... P-Pretty good... Y-Your princess approves.\par
\par
-2-female_must_masturbate=interested,Yes, ~name~. Now is the time for you to cum.\par
-2-female_start_masturbating=interested,You're jilling off SO eagerly, ~name~.\par
-2-female_masturbating=horny,Oh, yes, stroke your slit, ~name~.\par
-2-female_masturbating=horny,Flick your bean for the future queen!\par
-2-female_masturbating=horny,Tease your little cunt for me, ~name~...\par
-2-female_masturbating=horny,I bet that pussy can spread farther than that. Here. Let me try...\par
-2-female_masturbating=horny,You're getting so red in the face... It won't be too long now...\par
-2-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,S-So lewd! I've never seen a girl squirt so much before!\par
-2-female_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
-2-female_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
-2-female_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
-2-female_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO! LOOK HOW LEWD ARE YOU BEING, MY LITTLE PET!\par
-2-female_masturbating=happy,You've not been cuter, ~name~.\par
-2-female_masturbating=intertested,First you stripped for me, now you will cum for me.\par
-2-female_masturbating=appreciative,Thank you for the lewd noises, ~name~. I'll think of them when I masturbate next.\par
-2-female_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! SQUIRT OUT YOUR PUSSY MILK! YES! SQUIRT IT OUT ALL OVER YOUR THIGHS!\par
-2-female_must_masturbate=calm,You're fingering yourself in front of a princess without permission?\par
-2-female_start_masturbating=calm,Well you BETTER be good if you don't want to face the consequences.\par
-2-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're really good at this...\par
-2-female_masturbating=interested,I never knew how much I wanted to see ~name~ play with her pussy...\par
-2-female_masturbating=horny,OH, YES! STROKE YOUR SLIT! OH, YES!\par
-2-female_masturbating=embarrassed,OH MY! I COULD NEVER DO SOMETHING SO  LEWD WITH SO MUCH\par
-2-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're ADORABLE, ~name~!\par
-2-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,WOW! SO MUCH CUM IS SQUIRTING OUT OF YOU!\par
\par
-2-female_must_masturbate,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO! Do you know how long I've waited to see this, Zizou? My rival brought so low as to cum for me?\par
-2-female_start_masturbating,target:zizou=calm,Now START!\par
-2-female_masturbating,target:zizou=interested,Oooooh... It's better than I had dreamed it would be...\par
-2-female_masturbating,target:zizou=gloating,Tease your slit, rub your clit, and make sure to scream for me when you cum!\par
-2-female_masturbating,target:zizou=happy,You're ridiculously cute, Zizou. This is a dream come true.\par
-2-female_masturbating,target:zizou=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Zizou. I will never forget this.\par
-2-female_masturbating,target:zizou=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
-2-female_finished_masturbating,target:zizou=shocked,S-SO MUCH JIZZ! YOU'RE QUITE A LEWD GODDESS!\par
\par
-2-female_must_masturbate,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! SOLA THE STUDENT! NOW YOU MUST STROKE YOUR SLIT FOR ME!\par
-2-female_start_masturbating,target:sola=calm,Shall we begin, Sola?\par
-2-female_masturbating,target:sola=interested,Oh... How sweet this is to see. Sola going fingers deep...\par
-2-female_masturbating,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! Such a shameful display from such an innocent girl!\par
-2-female_masturbating,target:sola=happy,Do you like being so lewd, Sola?\par
-2-female_masturbating,target:sola=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Sola. I will never forget this.\par
-2-female_masturbating,target:sola=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
-2-female_finished_masturbating,target:sola=shocked,OH MY! YOU'RE SO QUICK TO CUM, SOLA!\par
\par
-2-female_must_masturbate,target:blad=gloating,Put on a show for us, Blad!\par
-2-female_start_masturbating,target:blad=calm,You're doing very well, Blad.\par
-2-female_masturbating,target:blad=interested,I really want to taste your wet pussy, Blad. May I?\par
-2-female_masturbating,target:blad=gloating,Show us your most lewd face, Blad!\par
-2-female_masturbating,target:blad=happy,I am gvreatly enjoying this, Blad.\par
-2-female_masturbating,target:blad=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Blad. I will never forget this.\par
-2-female_masturbating,target:blad=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
-2-female_finished_masturbating,target:blad=horny,So... Good... You must be a proffessional, Blad.\par
\par
#finished\par
-1-male_must_masturbate=interested,Oh,yes, ~name~... Begin to commit such a lewd act for me...\par
-1-male_start_masturbating=interested,I didn't think it would be this sexy...\par
-1-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Keep going... I've actually started a little bit too...\par
-1-male_masturbating=horny,Keep... Going... ~name~...\par
-1-male_masturbating=horny,Oh, ~name~... Your cock is too cute...\par
-1-male_masturbating=horny,Nice technique! May I try to make you cum?\par
-1-male_masturbating=horny,This looks fun and all, but wouldn't you rather stick that rod of yours in between my royal my royal pussy lips?\par
-1-male_finished_masturbating=shocked,OH! SO MUCH IS COMINGOUT OF YOU! H-HOW LEWD!\par
-1-male_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
-1-male_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
-1-male_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
-1-male_masturbating=happy,You're being cuter than I thought you'd be, ~name~.\par
-1-male_masturbating=gloating,Stroke! Stroke! Stroke! Good pet! Don't stop!\par
-1-male_masturbating=interested,I bet that'd feel sooo good pumping in and out of my little cunt... Or my royal anus...\par
-1-male_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! You're making the lewdest noises I've ever heard!\par
-1-male_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! What a lewd show! Shower the floor with your cum! That's it! OH, YES!!!\par
-1-male_must_masturbate=angry,I-I am not that interested in you, ~name~! I don't care if you're jerking yourself off!\par
-1-male_start_masturbating=angry,You PERVERT! How DARE you start playing with your little... P-Penis... In front of me!\par
-1-male_masturbating=shy,K-Keep going... I never said to stop...\par
-1-male_masturbating=shy,H-How lewd...\par
-1-male_masturbating=embarrassed,I can't believe you're doing this!\par
-1-male_masturbating=shy,(Ah, it's so cute... But I can't let him know how horny he's making me...)\par
-1-male_masturbating=embarrassed,T-This is too lewd for me! I-I can't look!\par
-1-male_finished_masturbating=shy,You were... P-Pretty good... Y-Your princess approves.\par
\par
-1-female_must_masturbate=interested,Yes, ~name~. Now is the time for you to cum.\par
-1-female_start_masturbating=interested,You're jilling off SO eagerly, ~name~.\par
-1-female_masturbating=horny,Oh, yes, stroke your slit, ~name~.\par
-1-female_masturbating=horny,Flick your bean for the future queen!\par
-1-female_masturbating=horny,Tease your little cunt for me, ~name~...\par
-1-female_masturbating=horny,I bet that pussy can spread farther than that. Here. Let me try...\par
-1-female_masturbating=horny,You're getting so red in the face... It won't be too long now...\par
-1-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,S-So lewd! I've never seen a girl squirt so much before!\par
-1-female_must_masturbate=gloating,Now you must cum for your mistress!\par
-1-female_start_masturbating=gloating,Start, pet. I want to see you covered in your own cum, you little slut.\par
-1-female_masturbating=gloating,You're being so lewd. You like being owned, Don't you, ~name~,you slut?\par
-1-female_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO! LOOK HOW LEWD ARE YOU BEING, MY LITTLE PET!\par
-1-female_masturbating=happy,You've not been cuter, ~name~.\par
-1-female_masturbating=intertested,First you stripped for me, now you will cum for me.\par
-1-female_masturbating=appreciative,Thank you for the lewd noises, ~name~. I'll think of them when I masturbate next.\par
-1-female_finished_masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! SQUIRT OUT YOUR PUSSY MILK! YES! SQUIRT IT OUT ALL OVER YOUR THIGHS!\par
-1-female_must_masturbate=calm,You're fingering yourself in front of a princess without permission?\par
-1-female_start_masturbating=calm,Well you BETTER be good if you don't want to face the consequences.\par
-1-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're really good at this...\par
-1-female_masturbating=interested,I never knew how much I wanted to see ~name~ play with her pussy...\par
-1-female_masturbating=horny,OH, YES! STROKE YOUR SLIT! OH, YES!\par
-1-female_masturbating=embarrassed,OH MY! I COULD NEVER DO SOMETHING SO  LEWD WITH SO MUCH\par
-1-female_masturbating=shy,Wow... You're ADORABLE, ~name~!\par
-1-female_finished_masturbating=shocked,WOW! SO MUCH CUM IS SQUIRTING OUT OF YOU!\par
\par
-1-female_must_masturbate,target:zizou=gloating,OHOHOHO! Do you know how long I've waited to see this, Zizou? My rival brought so low as to cum for me?\par
-1-female_start_masturbating,target:zizou=calm,Now START!\par
-1-female_masturbating,target:zizou=interested,Oooooh... It's better than I had dreamed it would be...\par
-1-female_masturbating,target:zizou=gloating,Tease your slit, rub your clit, and make sure to scream for me when you cum!\par
-1-female_masturbating,target:zizou=happy,You're ridiculously cute, Zizou. This is a dream come true.\par
-1-female_masturbating,target:zizou=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Zizou. I will never forget this.\par
-1-female_masturbating,target:zizou=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
-1-female_finished_masturbating,target:zizou=shocked,S-SO MUCH JIZZ! YOU'RE QUITE A LEWD GODDESS!\par
\par
-1-female_must_masturbate,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! SOLA THE STUDENT! NOW YOU MUST STROKE YOUR SLIT FOR ME!\par
-1-female_start_masturbating,target:sola=calm,Shall we begin, Sola?\par
-1-female_masturbating,target:sola=interested,Oh... How sweet this is to see. Sola going fingers deep...\par
-1-female_masturbating,target:sola=gloating,OHOHOHO! Such a shameful display from such an innocent girl!\par
-1-female_masturbating,target:sola=happy,Do you like being so lewd, Sola?\par
-1-female_masturbating,target:sola=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Sola. I will never forget this.\par
-1-female_masturbating,target:sola=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
-1-female_finished_masturbating,target:sola=shocked,OH MY! YOU'RE SO QUICK TO CUM, SOLA!\par
\par
-1-female_must_masturbate,target:blad=gloating,Put on a show for us, Blad!\par
-1-female_start_masturbating,target:blad=calm,You're doing very well, Blad.\par
-1-female_masturbating,target:blad=interested,I really want to taste your wet pussy, Blad. May I?\par
-1-female_masturbating,target:blad=gloating,Show us your most lewd face, Blad!\par
-1-female_masturbating,target:blad=happy,I am gvreatly enjoying this, Blad.\par
-1-female_masturbating,target:blad=appreciative,Thank you for this memory, Blad. I will never forget this.\par
-1-female_masturbating,target:blad=horny,Oh, fuck yes! I HAVE to finger myself to this!\par
-1-female_finished_masturbating,target:blad=horny,So... Good... You must be a proffessional, Blad.\par
\par
\par
\par
#SELF MASTURBATING\par
#If your character is naked and loses a hand, they have lost the game and must masturbate.\par
#These lines only come up in the relevant stages, so you don't need to include the stage numbers here. Just remember which stage is which when you make the images. The "starting" image is still in the naked stage.\par
#The "finished_masturbating" line will repeat can repeat many times if the game is not yet finished. This plays as opponents comment on the how good their hands are.\par
\par
must_masturbate_first=loss,NO! NO! NO!!! THIS ISN'T FAIR! I DEMAND A REDO OF THE GAME! NOW! NOWNOWNOW!!! DO YOU NOT HEAR ME! I SAID NO! WHAT DO YOU MEAN I HAVE TO? ... Fine...\par
must_masturbate=loss,Damn you all! I shouldn't have to do this! I'm better than ALL of you filthy peons!\par
start_masturbating=starting,Ok, Here I go. Remember this day as the day Princess Riva graced you with her orgasm\par
masturbating=calm,Oh... This is really good...\par
masturbating=happy,Do I enjoy exhibitionism? I think I may...\par
masturbating=angry,Why are you smiling, ~player~? You don't have the right to get turned on by me!\par
masturbating=interested,I really am having a good time after all...\par
masturbating=horny,Oh... Zizou... One day, I will eat you out...\par
masturbating=shy,S-Stop staring at me! You P-Perverts!\par
masturbating=shocked,OH! I MAY HAVE FOUND MY G-SPOT!!!\par
masturbating=gloating,OHOHOHO!!! Enjoying the show? Good, pet.\par
masturbating=interested,Oh, ~player~... I will let you taste my juices if you grovel...\par
masturbating=horny,Oh... Oh... OH!!! I'm losing my head over this...\par
masturbating=shy,P-Please don't stare too much...\par
masturbating=angry,How DARE you not kneel before me while I masturbate!\par
masturbating=embarrassed,(I CAN'T believe I'm doing this...)\par
masturbating=horny,I really need to do this more...\par
masturbating=angry,B-Bow before me! Bow before me as I finger my regal slit!\par
masturbating=shy,A-Are you enjoying this..?\par
heavy_masturbating=heavy,OH, FUCK, YES! I NEED THIS!\par
finishing_masturbating=finishing,Here! I! Goooooooaaaaaah!!!\par
finished_masturbating=finished,T-That... Was amazing...\par
\par
\par
#GAME OVER VICTORY\par
\par
#stage-generic line that will be used for every individual stage that doesn't have a line written\par
game_over_victory=calm,I\par
\par
#stage-specific lines that override the stage-generic one\par
0-game_over_victory=excited,I knew I would win! I knew it because I'm better than all of you!\par
1-game_over_victory=happy,I knew I would win! I knew it because I'm better than all of you!\par
2-game_over_victory=calm,I knew I would win! I knew it because I'm better than all of you!\par
3-game_over_victory=shy,I knew I would win! I knew it because I'm better than all of you!\par
4-game_over_victory=embarrassed,I knew I would win! I knew it because I'm better than all of you!\par
5-game_over_victory=shy,I knew I would win! I knew it because I'm better than all of you!\par
6-game_over_victory=happy,I knew I would win! I knew it because I'm better than all of you!\par
7-game_over_victory=angry,I knew I would win! I knew it because I'm better than all of you!\par
-3-game_over_victory=embarrassed,I knew I would win! I knew it because I'm better than all of you!\par
\par
\par
\par
#GAME OVER DEFEAT\par
game_over_defeat=embarrassed,I will repent. I'm sorry. I will stop my perversions. Just don't tell my people.\par
\par
\par
}
 