
# KKL Control Protocol

Starting from version v100.2, KKL comes with an optional built-in TCP server allowing for remote control of a running KKL instance.

## Enabling the server

The remote-control server is disabled by default; on startup, `KKL.exe` will look for a file named `enable_server` in the same 
directory as itself.

If this file exists, KKL will attempt to bind to port `8008` on `127.0.0.1`. If it fails to bind to the port, the server will
silently disable itself for that session.

## Protocol Overview

_Note: a simple example of a protocol client implementation (in Python) can be found alongside this document._

In the following documentation, the _server_ refers to the KKL instance.

All messages transmitted between client and server begin with the following 9-byte header:

| Offset | Length | Data                | Description |
| ------ | ------ | ------------------- | ----------- |
| 0      | 4      | Protocol header     | "KKL " (note the trailing space), in ASCII / UTF-8
| 4      | 1      | Message type        | See below
| 5      | 4      | Payload data length | Does not include header data

## Message Types

| Byte Value | Message Type  | Sent By | Description |
| ---------- | ------------- | ------- | ----------- |
| 0x01       | Command       | Client  | Instructs the server KKL instance to perform some action.
| 0x02       | Cmd. Response | Server  | Sent by the server in response to a Command message. The server will send multiple response packets for a given command.
| 0x03       | Image Data    | Server  | Contains the final output image generated by an Import or Screenshot command.
| 0x04       | Heartbeat     | Server  | The server will send these roughly every 5 seconds after establishing a connection with a client.

### Command Messages

The payload of a Command message is a UTF-8 string containing a JSON-serialized object.

The following fields are common to all Command types:

| Field Name | Data Type        | Description |
| ---------- | ---------------- | ----------- |
| `type`     | string           | The command to issue to KKL. See below for info on each command.
| `id`       | number, optional | Will not affect processing on its own, but the server will attach it to all outgoing messages related to this request.

The following is a quick overview of currently implemented Command types and their parameters:

| Command        | `type` Field Values           | Parameters  |
| -------------- | ----------------------------- | ----------- |
| Version        | `version`                     | None
| Full Import    | `import`                      | `code`
| Partial Import | `import_partial`              | `code`
| Screenshot     | `screenshot`                  | `bg`
| Reset          | `reset_full`, `reset_partial` | None 
| Peek/Poke      | `character_data`              | `character`, `op`, `tabName`, `tabParameter`, `value`, `internalNames`
| Set Alpha      | `alpha`                       | `character`, `colorIndex`, `part`, `alpha`
| Dump Character | `dump_character`              | `character`

#### Version Command

This command retrieves the major and minor version of the remote KKL server.
The `data` field of the server response will be a subobject; the server version numbers will be within the `major` and `minor` fields of this subobject.

#### Full and Partial Import Commands

These commands instruct KKL to import a code into the Kisekae workspace.
A "full import" will additionally take a screenshot immediately afterwards, similarly to the traditional file-based image export flow.

A full import command will return its response as an Image Data message (type `0x03`), however a partial import command
will use a regular Command Response message to report completion.

The code to import must be specified as a string-valued `code` field within the Command object.
For the full Import command (that takes screenshots), alpha parameters can be prepended to the code just as in regular file-based imports.
(Alpha parameters aren't supported for partial imports yet.)

#### Screenshot Command

Screenshot commands take a screenshot of the Kisekae workspace.

A boolean `bg` parameter can be passed as an optional field within the Command object; if `true`, then the scene background will be included
within the returned image. By default, scene backgrounds will not be included in screenshots.

This command will always return its response as an Image Data message (type `0x03`).

#### Reset Commands

Reset commands instruct KKL to reset the scene prop, background, and camera settings.
A "full" reset will also hide all but the first character in the Kisekae lineup. This is useful for making standard pose images.

#### Peek / Poke (aka Character Data) Commands

These commands can be used to directly inspect and modify the data of characters within the Kisekae workspace.

| Parameter         | Data Type                 | Description |
| ----------------- | ------------------------- | ----------- |
| `character`       | number                    | The zero-based index of the character to inspect or modify. Valid range is 0-8, inclusive.
| `op`              | string                    | Either `get` or `set`.
| `tabName`         | string                    | The name of the data group (or "tab") to inspect / modify.
| `tabParameter`    | string or number          | The numeric index or internal name of the parameter within the group to inspect / modify.
| `value`           | number / boolean / string | If `op` == `set`, then this is the value that the named parameter will be set to.
| `internalNames`   | boolean, optional         | If `true`, then `tabName` and `tabParameter` will be interpreted as direct string keys within the Kisekae-internal `charaData` structure. (not recommended)

When `internalNames` is `false` (the default), `tabName` as the prefix for an import/export data group, and `tabParameter` is interpreted as an index
within that data group.

For example, consider the following Kisekae code fragment (containing information related to character positioning):
```
100**bc410.500.0.0.1.0
```

The prefix for this data group is `bc`, and the elements within the group are `[410, 500, 0, 0, 1, 0]`.

The element at index 4 corresponds to the flag controlling the visibility of the character's shadow.
Therefore, if we wanted to determine whether the first loaded character's shadow was visible or not, we could issue the command:
```json
{
    "type": "character_data",
    "op": "get",
    "character": 0,
    "tabName": "bc",
    "tabParameter": 4
}
```

If we wanted to disable that same character's shadow without using the Import command or having to resort to Kisekae code
manipulation, we can issue the command:
```json
{
    "type": "character_data",
    "op": "set",
    "character": 0,
    "tabName": "bc",
    "tabParameter": 4,
    "value": false
}
```

The same command could also be used to enable the character's shadow, by setting the `value` field to `true`.

#### Part Transparency Control Commands

(documentation coming soon)

#### Dump Character Command

This command dumps the entire internal character data structure for the given `character` within the Kisekae workspace
and returns it as the response `data`.

This command is relatively fast, but produces a _lot_ of output.

### Command Response Messages

The payload of a Command Response message is also a UTF-8 string containing a JSON-serialized object.
These objects have the following schema:

```
{
    "status": "in_progress" | "done" | "error",
    "id": number (optional),
    "data": <any type>,
    "reason": string (only if status == "error"),
}
```

The `"id"` parameter indicates what request this response corresponds to; if the original request had no associated `"id"`, then it will be set to 0.

Upon receiving a request, the server will first send a response with `"status": "in_progress"` to indicate that it has received the request. 

Once a given request is complete, the server will send another response with `"status": "done"` or `"status": "error"` as appropriate.
Commands that return image data (such as Full Import or Screenshot commands) will instead return an Image Data message on successful completion.

For responses with `"status": "error"`, a `reason` string will also be provided with a human-friendly description of the error.

For commands that return some kind of data response, the `data` field will contain that information for successful responses.

### Image Data Messages

Success for Import commands is indicated via an Image Data message, which contains the following data:

| Offset | Length   | Data              | Description |
| ------ | -------- | ----------------- | ----------- |
| 9      | 4        | Identifier        | The `"id"` parameter sent with the original request.
| 13     | Variable | Image data        | This is the PNG-encoded data that KKL would normally write to a file after importing.

### Heartbeat Messages

The server will send heartbeat messages to all connected clients roughly every five seconds (though KKL lag and runtime freezes may cause heartbeats to be delayed).

Heartbeat messages have no payload and have a payload data length of 0.
